CHAPTER

6:

HE COMBINATION

CUSTOMIZATION OPTIONS
Of ABILITY

SCORES, RACE,

class, and background defines your
character's capabilities in the game, and
the personal details you create set your
character apart from every other character.
Even within your class and race, you have
options to fine-tune what your character
can do. But this chapter is for players who-with the
DM's permission-want
to go a step further.
This chapter defines two optional sets of rules for
customizing your character: multiclassing and feats.
Multiclassing lets you combine classes together,
and feats are special options you can choose instead
of increasing your ability scores as you gain leveis.
Your DM decides whether these options are available
in a campaign.

MULTICLASSING
Multiclassing allows you to gain leveis in multi pie
classes. Doing so lets you mix the abilities of those
classes to realize a character concept that might not be
reAected in one of the standard class options.
With this role, you have the option of gaining a levei
in a new class whenever you advance in levei, instead
of gaining a leveI in your current class. Your leveis in
ali your classes are added together to determine your
character leveI. For example, if you have three leveIs in
wizard and two in fighter, you're a 5th-levei character.
As you advance in leveis, you might primarily remain
a member of your original class with just a few leveis
in another class, or you might change course entire!y,
never looking back at the c1ass you left behind. Vou
might even start progressing in a third or fourth c1ass.
Compared to a single-c1ass character of the same levei,
you'lI sacrifice some focus in exchange for versatility.
4
MULTICLASStNG

•

_

MULTlCLASSING

PREREQUISITES

Class

Ability Score Minimum

Barbarian
Bard

Strength 13
(harisma 13

Cleric

Wisdom 13

Druid
Fighter

Wisdom 13

Monk
Paladin
Ranger

Dexterity 13 and Wisdom 13
Strength 13 and (harisma 13
Dexterity 13 and Wisdom 13

Rogue
Sorcerer

Dexterity 13
(harisma 13

Warlock

(harisma

Wizard

Intelligence

Strength

EXPERIENCE

13 ar Dexterity 13

13
13

POINTS

The experience point cost to gain a levei is always
based on your total character leve!. as shown in the
Character Advancement table in chapter 1, not your levei
in a particular c1ass. So, if you are a c1eric 6jfighter 1,
you must gain enough XP to reach 8th levei before you
can take your second levei as a fighter or your seventh
levei as a c1eric.

EXAMPLE

Gary is playing a 4th-levei fighter. When his character earns
enough experience points to reach Sth levei, Gary decides
that his character will multielass instead of continuing to
progress as a fighter. Gary's fighter has been spending a lot
of time with Dave's rogue, and has even been doing some
jobs on the side for the local thieves' guild as a bruiser. Gary
decides that his character will multielass into the rogue e1ass,
and thus his character becomes a 4th.level fighter and lstlevei rogue (written as fighter 4/rogue 1).
When Gary's character earns enough experience to
reach 6th levei, he can decide whether to add another
fighter levei (becoming a fighter S/rogue 1), another rogue
levei (becoming a fighter 4/rogue 2), ar a levei in a third
e1ass, perhaps dabbling in wizardry thanks to the tome of
mysterious lore he acquired (becoming a fighter 4/rogue 1/
wizard 1).

••

PREREQ_U_IS_I_T_E_S

To qualify for a new c1ass, you must meet the ability score
prerequisites for both your current c1ass and your new
one, as shown in the Multiclassing Prerequisites tabJe.
For example, a barbarian who decides to multiclass into
the druid c1ass must have both Strength and Wisdom
scores of 13 or higher. Without the full training that
a beginning character receives, you must be a quick
study in your new c1ass, having a natural aptitude that
is reAected by higher-than-average ability scores.

••

HIT

POINTS

AND HIT

DICE

Vou gain the hit points from your new c1ass as described
for leveis after 1st. You gain the 1st-leveI hit points for a
c1ass only when you are a 1st-levei character.
Vou add together the Hit Dice granted by ali your
classes to form your pool of Hit Dice. If the Hit Dice are
the same die type, you can simply pool them together.
For example, both the fighter and the paladin have a
dlO. so ifyou are a palndin 5/fighter 5, you have ten dlO
Hit Dice. Ifyour classes give you Hit Dice of different
types, keep track of them separate!y. If you are a paladin
5jcleric 5, for example, you have five dlO Hit Dice and
five d8 Hit Dice.

PROFICIENCY

BONUS

Vour proficiency bonus is always based on your total
character levei, as shown in the Character Advancement
table in chapter 1, not your levei in a particular class.
For example, ifyou are a fighter 3/rogue 2, YOllhave the
proficiency bonlls of a 5th-levei character, which is +3.

PART 1 I CUSTo~nZATION OPTIONS

UNARMORED

PROFICIENCIES
When you gain a levei in a class other than your first,
you gain only some of that class's starting proficiencies,
as shown in the Multiclassing Proficiencies table.
MUlTICLASSING

PROFICIENCIES

Class

Proficiencies

Barbarian

Shields, simple weapons,

Gained

Bard

Light armar, one skill ofyour ehoiee, one

martial weapons

musical instrument af your choice

Clerie
Druid

Light armar, medium

armar, shields

Light armar, medium

armar, shields

(druids

will not wear armar ar use shields made of
metal)
Light armar, medium

Fighter

armar, shields,

simple

weapons, martial weapons

Monk
Paladin

Simple weapons, shortswords
Light armar, medium armar, shields,

sim pie

Ranger

weapons, martial weapons
Light armar, medium armar, shields,

simple

weapons,

martial weapons,

one skill from the

elass's skill list
Light armar, one skill from the c1ass's skill list,

Rogue

thieves'

tools

Sorcerer

Light armar, simple weapons

Warloek
Wizard

CLASS FEATURES
When you gain a new leveI in a class, you get its features
for that leveI. A few features, however, have additional
rules when you're multiclassing: Channel Divinity, Extra
Attack, Unarmored Defense, and Spellcasting.
CHANNEL

DIVINITY

Ifyou already have the Channel Divinity feature and gain
a leveI in a class that also grants the feature, you gain the
Channel Divinity effects granted by that class, but getting
the feature again doesn't give you an additional use of
it. You gain additional uses only when you reach a class
levei that explicitly grants them to you. For example, if
you are a cleric 6/paladin 4, you can use Channel Divinity
twice between rests beca use you are high enough levei
in the cleric class to have more uses. Whenever you use
the feature, you can choose any of the Channel Divinity
effects available to you from your two classes.
EXTRA ATTACK

If you gain the Extra Attack class feature from more
than one class, the features don't add together. Vou
can't make more than two attacks with this feature
unless il says you do (as lhe fighter's version of Extra
Attack does). Similarly, the warlock's eldritch invocation
Thirsting Blade doesn't give you additional attacks if you
also have Extra Attack.

PART I

I

CUSTOMIZATlON

OPTIONS

DEFENSE

]f you already have the Unarmored Defense feature, you
can't gain it again from another class.
SPELLCASTING

Your capacity for spellcasting depends partly on your
combined leveis in ali your spellcasting classes and
partly on your individual leveis in those classes. Once
you have the Spellcasting feature from more than one
class, use the rules below. If you multiclass but have the
Spellcasting feature from only one class, you follow the
rules as described in that class.
SpeJls Known and Prepared. Vou determine
what spells you know and can prepare for each class
individually, as if you were a single.classed member of
that class. ]f you are a ranger 4/wizard 3, for example,
you know three Ist.level ranger spells based on your
leveis in the ranger class. As 3rd-Ievel wizard, you know
three wizard cantrips, and your spellbook contains ten
wizard spells, two of which (the two you gained when
you reached 3rd levei as a wizard) can be 2nd-levei
spells. Ifyour Intelligence is 16, you can prepare six
wizard spells from your spellbook.
Each spell you know and prepare is associated with one
of your classes, and you use the spellcasting ability of that
class when you cast the spell. Similarly, a spellcasting
focus, such as a holy symbol, can be used only for the
spells from the class associated with that focus.
SpeJl Slots. Vou determine your available spell slots
by adding together ali your leveIs in the bard, cleric,
druid, sorcerer, and wizard classes, half your leveis
(raunded down) in the paladin and ranger classes, and
a third of your fighter or rogue leveis (rounded down)
if you have the Eldritch Knight or the Arcane Trickster
feature. Use this total to determine your spell slots by
consulting the Multiclass Spellcaster table.
Ifyou have more than one spellcasting class, this table
might give you spell slots of a levei that is higher than
the spells you know or can prepare. Vou can use those
slots, but only to cast your lower.level spells. If a lowerlevei spell that you cast, like burning bands, has an
enhanced effect when cast using a higher.level slot, you
can use the enhanced effect, even though you don't have
any spells of that higher leveI.
For example, if you are the aforementioned ranger 4/
wizard 3, you count as a 5th-levei character when
determining your spell slots: you have four Ist.level
slots, three 2nd.level slots, and two 3rd.level slots.
However, you don't know any 3rd.level spells, nor do you
know any 2nd-levei ranger spells. Vou can use the spell
slots of those leveis to cast the spells you do know-and
potentially enhance their effects.
Pact Magie. If you have both the Spellcasting class
feature and the Pact Magic class feature from the warlock
class, you can use the spell slots you gain from the Pact
Magic feature to cast spells you know or have prepareu
from classes with the Spellcasting class feature, and you
can use the spell slots you gain fram the Spellcasting
class feature to cast warlock spells you know.

MULTICLASS

SPELLCASTER:

SPELL

PER SPELL

SLOTS

LvI.

1st

1st

2

2nd

3rd

4th

LEVEL
5th

6th

7th

8th

9th

Climbing doesn't halve your speed.
Vou can make a running long jump or a running high
jump after moving only 5 feet on foot, rather than
10 feet.
ACTOR

2nd

3

3rd

4

2

4th

4

3

5th

4

3

2

6th

4

3

1

Skilled at mimicry and dramatics, you gain the
following benefits:

7th

4

3

3
3

8th

4

3

3

2

9th

4

3

3

1

10th

4

3

2

11th

4

3
3

3
3
3

3

2

12th

4

3

1

4

3

2

1

1

14th

4

1

1

4

3
3

2

15th

3
3

3
3
3

2

13th

3
3

3

2

1

1

16th

4

3

3

3

2

1

1

17th

4

3
3

3

2

1

1

1

18th

4

3
3

3

3

1

1

19th

4

3

3

3

3

2

1

20th

4

3

3

3

3

2

2

FEATS
A feat represents a talent or an area of expertise that gives
a character special capabilities. lt embodies training,
experience, and abitities beyond what a c1ass provides.
At certain leveIs, your c1ass gives you the Ability Score
Improvement feature. Using the optional feats rule, you
can forgo taking that feature to take a feat of your choice
instead. Vou can take each feat only once, unless the
feat's description says otherwise.
Vou must meet any prerequisite specified in a feat
to take that feat. If you ever lose a feat's prerequisite,
you can't use lhat feat until you regain the prerequisite.
For example, the Grappler feat requires you to have a
Strength of 13 or higher. If your Strength is reduced
below 13 somehow-perhaps
by a withering curseyou can't benefit from the Grappler feat until your
Strength is restored.

Increase your Charisma score by 1, to a maximum of 20.
Vou have advantage on Charisma (Deception) and
Charisma (Performance) checks when trying to pass
yourself off as a different person.
Vou can mimic the speech of another person or the
sounds made by other creatures. Vou must have
heard the person speaking. or heard the creature
make the sound, for at least 1 minute. A successful
Wisdom (Insight) check contested by your Charisma
(Deception) check allows a tistener to determine that
the effect is faked.
CHARGER
When you use your action to Dash, you can use a
bonus action to make one melee weapon attack or to
shove a creature.
1fyou move at least 10 feet in a straight tine
immediately before taking this bonus action, you either
gain a +5 bonus to the attack's damage roll (if you chose
to make a melee attack and hit) or push the target up
to 10 feet away from you (if you chose to shove and
you succeed).
CROSSBOW

EXPERT

Thanks to extensive practice with the crossbow, you
gain the following benefits:
Vou ignore the loading quality of crossbows with
which you are proficient.
Being within 5 feet of a hostile creature doesn't
impose disadvantage on your ranged attack rolls.
When you use the Attack action and attack with a onehanded weapon, you can use a bonus action to attack
with a loaded hand crossbow you are holding.
DEFENSIVE

DUELIST

Prerequisite: Dexterity 13 or higher
ALERT
Always on the lookout for danger, you gain the
following benefits:
Vou gain a +5 bonus to initiative.
Vou can't be surprised while you are conscious.
Other creatures don't gain advantage on attack rolls
against you as a result of being hidden from you.
ATHLETE
Vou have undergone extensive physical training to gain
the following benefits:
Increase your Strength or Dexterity score by 1, to a
maximum of 20.
When you are prone, standing up uses only 5 feet of
you r movement.

When you are wielding a finesse weapon with which
you are proficient and another creature hits you with
a melee attack, you can use your reaction to add your
proficiency bonus to your AC for that attack, potentially
causing the attack to miss you.
DUAL

WIELDER

Vou master fighting with two weapons, gaining the
following benefits:
Vou gain a +1 bonus to AC while you are wielding a
separate melee weapon in each hand.
Vou can use two-weapon fighting even whcn the onehanded melee weapons you are wielding aren't light.
Vou can draw or stow two one-handed weapons when
you would normally be able to draw or stow only one.
PART I I CUSTOMIZATIO.

OPTIO

S

DUNGEON

DELVER

Alert to the hidden traps and secret doors found in many
dungeons, you gain the following benefits:
Vou have advantage on Wisdom (Perception) and
Intelligence (Investigation) checks made to detect the
presence of secret doors,
Vou have advantage on saving throws made to avoid
or resist traps.
Vou have resistance to the damage dealt by traps.
Vou can search for traps while traveling at a normal
pace, instead of only at a slow pace.

DURABLE
Hardy and resilient, you gain the following benefits:
lncrease your Constitution score by I, to a
maximum of 20.

,66

PART I

I

CUSTOMIZATION

OPTIONS

When you roll a Hit Die to regain hit points, the
minimum number of hit points you regain from
the roll equals twice your Constitution modifier
(minimum of 2).

ELEMENTAL ADEPT
Prerequisite: The ability to cast at least one spell
When you gain this feat, choose one of the following
damage types: acid, cold, fire, lightning, or thunder.
Spells you cast ignore resistance to damage of the
chosen type. In addition, when you roll damage for a
spell you cast that deals damage of that type, you can
treat any I on a damage die as a 2.
Vou can select this feat multi pIe times. Each time
you do so, you must choose a different damage type.

GRAPPLER

INSPIRING

Prerequisite: Strength 13 ar higher

Prerequisite: Charisma 13 or higher

You've developed the skills necessary to hold your
own in close-quarters grappling. Vou gain the
following benefits:
Vou have advantage on attack rolls against a creature
you are grappling.
Vou can use your action to try to pin a creature grappled by you. To do so, make another grapple check. lf
you succeed, you and the creature are both restrained
until the grapple ends.
Creatures that are one size larger than you don't automatically succeed on checks to escape your grapple.

Vou can spend 10 minutes inspiring your companions,
shoring up their resolve to fight. When you do so, choose
up to six friendly creatures (which can include yourself)
within 30 feet of you who can see or hear you and who
can understand you. Each creature can gain temporary
hit points equal to your levei + your Charisma modifier.
A creature can't gain temporary hit points from this feat
again until it has finished a short or long rest.

GREAT WEAPON MASTER
You've learned to put the weight of a weapon to your
advantage, letting its momentum empower your strikes.
Vou gain the following benefits:
On your turn, when you score a criticai hit with a
mele e weapon or reduce a creature to O hit points
with one, you can make one melee weapon attack as a
bonus action.
Before you make a melee attack with a heavy weapon
that you are proficient with, you can choose to take a
-5 penalty to the attack roll. If the attack hits, you add
+10 to the attack's damage.

HEALER
Vou are an able physician, allowing you to mend wounds
quickly and get your allies back in the fight. Vou gain the
following benefits:
When you use a healer's kit to stabilize a dying creature, that creature also regains 1 hit point.
As an action. you can spend one use of a healer's kit to
tend to a creature and restore 1d6 + 4 hit points to it,
plus additional hit points equal to the creature's Illaxilllurn nurnber of Hit Dice. The creature can't regain
hit points frolll this feat again until it finishes a short
ar long rest.

HEAVILY ARMORED
Prerequisite: Proliciency with mediuJ1Jarmor
Vou have trained to Illaster the use of heavy armor,
gaining the following benefits:
Increase your Strength score by 1, to a rnaximum of 20.
• You gain proficiency with heavy armor.

HEAVY ARMOR MASTER
Prerequisite: Proliciency with heavy armor
Vou can use your armor to deflect strikes that would kill
others. Vou gain the following benefits:
Increase your Strength score by 1, to a Illaximum of 20.
While you are wearing heavy armor, bludgeoning.
piercing, and slashing damage that you take from nonmagical weapons is reduced by 3.

LEADER

KEEN MIND
Vou have a mind that can track time, direction,
and detail with uncanny precision. Vou gain the
following benefits.
1ncrease your lntelligence score by 1, to a rnaximum
of20.
Vou always know which way is north.
Vou always know the number of hours lef! before the
next sunrise ar sunset.

Vou can accurately recall anything you have seen or
heard within the past month.

LIGHTLY ARMORED
Vou have trained to master the use of light armor,
gaining the following benefits:
Increase your Strength or Dexterity score by 1, to a
maximum of 20.
Vou gain proficiency with light armor.

LINGUIST
Vou have studied languages and codes, gaining the
following benefits:
Increase your Intelligence score by 1, to a maximum of 20.
Vou learn three languages of your choice.
Vou can ably create written ciphers. Others can't decipher acode you create unless you teach them, they
succeed on an Intelligence check (DC equal to your
1ntelligence score + your proficiency bonus), OI' they
use magic to decipher it.

LUCKY
Vou have inexplicable luck that seems to kick in at just
the right moment.
Vou have 3 luck points. Whenever you rnake an attack
roll, an ability check. ar a saving throw, you can spend
one luck point to roll an additional d20. Vou can choose
to spend one of your luck points after you roll the die,
but before the outcome is determined. Vou choose which
of the d20s is used for the attack roll, ability check, or
saving throw.
Vou can also spend one luck point when an attack
roll is made against you. RolI a d20, and then choose
whether the attack uses the attacker's rull or yours.
If more than one creature spends a luck point to
influence the outcome of a roll, lhe points cancel each
other oul; no additional dice are rolled.
Vou regain your expended luck points when you
finish a long rest.
PART 1 I CUSTOM IZA I ION OP1IONS

MAGE SLAYER
Vou have practiced techniques useful in melee combat
against spellcasters, gaining the following benefits:
When a creature within 5 feet of you casts a spell, you
can use your reaction to make a melee weapon attack
against that creature.
When you damage a creature that is concentrating on
a spell, that creature has disadvantage on the saving
throw it makes to maintain its concentration.
Vou have advantage on saving throws against spells
cast by creatures within 5 feet of you.

MAGIC INITIATE
Choose a c1ass: bard, c1eric, druid, sorcerer, warlock, or
wizard. Vou learn two cantrips of your choice from that
c1ass's spelllisl.
In addition, choose one 1st-levei spell from that same
lisl. Vou learn that spell and can cast it at its lowest
leveI. Once you cast it, you must finish a long rest before
you can cast it again.
Your spellcasting ability for these spells depends
on the c1ass you chose: Charisma for bard,
sorcerer, or warlock: Wisdom for c1eric or druid: or
Intelligence for wizard.

MARTIAL ADEPT
Vou have martial training that allows you to
perform special combat maneuvers. Vou gain the
following benefits:
Vou learn two maneuvers of your choice from among
those available to the Battle Master archetype in the
fighter c1ass. Ir a maneuver you use requires your target to make a saving throw to resist the maneuver's
effects, the saving throw DC equals 8 + your proficiency bonus + your Strength or Dexterity modifier
(your choice).
lfyou already have superiority dice, you gain one
more: otherwise, you have one superiority die, which
is a d6. This die is used to fuel your maneuvers. A
superiority die is expended when you use il. Vou
regain your expended superiority dice when you
finish a short or long resl.

MEDIUM ARMOR MASTER
Prerequisite: Proficiency with medium armor
Vou have practiced moving in medium armor to gain the
following benefits:
Wearing medium armor doesn't impose disadvantage
on your Dexterity (Stealth) checks.
When you wear medium armor, you can add 3,
rather than 2, to your AC if you have a Dexterity of
16 or higher.

MOBILE
Vou are exceptionally speedy and agile. Vou gain the
following benefits:
• Your speed increases by 10 feel.

[68

I'ART 1

I

CUSTOM[ZAT10N OI'T[ONS

When you use the Dash action, difficult terrain doesn't
cost you extra movement on that turno
When you make a melee attack against a creature, you
don't provoke opportunity attacks from that creature
for the rest of the turn, whether you hit or nol.

MODERATELY ARMORED
Prerequisite: Proficiency with Jight armor
Vou have trained to master the use of medium armor
and shields, gaining the following benefits:
Increase your Strength or Dexterity score by 1, to a
maximum of 20.
Vou gain proficiency with medium armor and shields.

MOUNTED

COMBATANT

Vou are a dangerous foe to face while mounted. While
you are mounted and aren't incapacitated, you gain the
following benefits:
Vou have advantage on melee attack rolls against any
unmounted creature that is smaller than your mounl.
Vou can force an attack targeted at your mount to target you instead.
Ir your mount is subjected to an effect that allows it to
make a Dexterity saving throw to take only half damage, it instead takes no damage if it succeeds on the
saving throw, and only half damage if it fails.

OBSERVANT
Quick to notice details of your environment, you gain
the following benefits:
Increase your Intelligence or Wisdom score by 1, to a
maximum of 20.
Ir you can see a creature's mouth while it is speaking
a Ianguage you understand, you can interpret what it's
saying by reading its lips.
Vou have a +5 bonus to your passive Wisdom
(Perception) and passive Intelligence (Investigation)
scores.

POLEARM MASTER
Vou can keep your enemies at bay with reach weapons.
Vou gain the following benetits:
When you take the Attack action and attack with only
a glaive, halberd, or quarterstaff, you can use a bonus
action to make a melee attack with the opposite end of
the weapon. The weapon's damage die for this attack
is a d4, and the attack deals bludgeoning damage.
While you are wielding a glaive, halberd, pike, or quarterstaff, other creatures provoke an opportunity attack
from you when they enter your reach.

RESILIENT
Choose one ability score. Vou gain the following benefits:
Increase the chosen ability score by 1, to a maximum
of20.
Vou gain proficiency in saving throws using the
chosen ability.

RITUAL CASTER
Prerequisite: Intelligence or Wisdom 13 or higher
Vou have learned a number of spells that you can cast as
rituais. These spells are written in a ritual book, which
you must have in hand while casting one of them.
When you choose this feat, you aequire a ritual book
holding two 1st-levei spells of your ehoiee. Choose one
of the following classes: bard, c1erie, druid, soreerer,
warlock, or wizard. Vou must choose your spells
from that c1ass's spelllist, and the spells you choose
must have the ritual tag. The c1ass you ehoose also
determines your spelleasting ability for these spells:
Charisma for bard, sorcerer, or warloek; Wisdom for
c1eric or druid; or Intelligenee for wizard.
\f you come aeross a spell in written form, sueh as a
magical speJl seroJl or a wizard's spellbook, you might
be able to add lt to your ritual book. The spell must be
on the spelllist for the c1ass you chose, the spell's leveI
ean be no higher than half your levei (rounded up), and

it must have the ritual tag. The proeess of copying the
spell into your ritual book takes 2 hours per levei of the
spell, and eosts 50 gp per leveI. The cost represents
material components you expend as you cxperiment
with the spell to master it, as well as the fine inks you
need to record it.

SAVAGE ATTACKER
anee per turn when you roll damage for a melee weapon
attaek, you ean reroll the weapon's damage diee and use
either total.

SENTINEL
Vou have mastered teehniques to take advantage
of every drop in any enemy's guard, gaining the
following benefits:
Whcn you hit a ereature with an opportunity attack,
the creature's speed beeornes O for the rest of
the turn.

PART I

CUSTOMIZ

n 10

: OP'flO.

t

Ih

Crealures wilhin 5 feel of you provoke opporlunity
atlacks from you even if they lake lhe Disengage
action bdore leaving your reach.
When a crealure within 5 feet of you makes an attack
againsl a larget olheI' lhan you (and lhal largel doesn'l
have lhis feal), you can use your reaction lo make a
melee weapon attack against lhe attacking crealure.

SHARPSHOOTER
Vou have maslered ranged weapons and can lllake
shols thal olhers lind impossible. Vou gain the
following benelits:
Attacking ai long range doesn'l impose disadvanlage
on your ranged weapon attack rolls.
Vour ranged weapon attacks ignore half cover and
lhree-quarlers cover.
Sdore you make an altack wilh a ranged weapon lhal
you are prolicienl wilh, you can choose lo take a -5
penally lo lhe attack roll. If the attack hils, you add +10
to lhe attack's damage.

SHIELD MASTER
Vou use shields notjust for proleclion bul also for
offense. Vou gain lhe following benelils while you are
wielding a shield:
If you lake lhe Attack action on your lurn, you can use
a bonus aclion to lry to shove a crealure wilhin 5 feel
of you wilh your shield.
lf you aren't incapacilated, you can add your shield's AC
bonus lo any Dexlerity saving lhrow you make against
a spell 01' olheI' harmful effect lhat targets only you.
lf you are subjecled lo an effecl lhal allows you lo
make a Dexlerity saving lhruw lo take only half damage, you ean use your reaclion lo lake no dalllage if
you succeed on lhe saving lhrow, interposing your
shield belween yourself and lhe source of lhe effecl.

SKILLED
Vou gain proliciency in any combinalion of three skills
01' lools of you r choice.

SKULKER
Prerequisile: Dexlerily 13 OI' higher
Vou are expert al slinking lhrough shadows. Vou gain
lhe following benelils:
Vou can try to hide when you are lighlly obscured
from the creature frum which you are hiding.
When you are hidden from a crealure and miss il with
a ranged weapon attack, making the attack doesn't
reveal your posilion.
Dilll light docsn'l impose disadvantage on your
Wisdom (Perceplion) checks relying on sighl.

SPELL SNIPER
Prerequisile: Thc abilily

lo

casl aI leasl one spell

Vou have learned lechniques to enhance your
attacks wilh cerlain kinds of spells, gaining the
following benelils:

'70

PA RT t

I

CUSTOlo.11ZATION

OPTlONS

When you caSl a spell lhal requires you to make an
attack roll, lhe spell's range is doubled.
Vour ranged spell attacks ignore half cover and
lhree-quarters cover.
Vou Jearn one canlrip thal requires an attack roll.
Choose lhe canlrip from lhe bard, cJerie, druid, sorcerer, warlock, 01' wizard spelllisl. Vour spellcasting
abilily for lhis cantrip depends on lhe spelllist you
chose from: Charisma for bard, sorcerer, 01' warlock;
Wisdom for cJeric 01' druid; 01' lnlelligence for wizard.

TAVERN BRAWLER
Accuslomed to rough-and-lumble lighling using
whalever weapons happen lo be ai hand, you gain lhe
following benelils:
lncrease your Strenglh 01' Constilulion score by I,
to a maximum of 20.
Vou are prolicienl wilh improvised weapons and
unarmed slrikes.
Vour unarmed strike uses a d4 for damage.
When you hil a creature with an unarmed strike 01' an
improvised weapon on your turn, you can use a bonus
action lOattempl to grapple the targel.

TOUGH
Vour hil point maximum increases by an amount equal
to lwiee your leveI when you gain lhis feal. Whenever
you gain a levei lhereafter, your hit point maximum
increases by an addilional 2 hil poinls.

WAR CASTER
Prerequisile: The abilily

lo

casl aI leasl one spell

Vou have pracliced casting spells in the midst of
combal, learning lechniques lhal grant you the
following benelils:
Vou have advantage on Conslilulion saving lhrows
lhat you lllake lOmainlain your concenlralion on a
spell when you lake damage.
Vou can perform lhe somatie cOlllponenls of spells
even when you have weapons OI'a shield in one OI'
bolh hands.
When a hoslile crealure's movement provokes an
opportunily attack from you, you can use your reaclion lo casl a spell at lhe creature, ralheI' than making
an opporlunity altack. The spellmusl have a casling
time of 1 aclion and musl larget only lhal crealure.

WEAPON

MASTER

Vou have pracliced extensively with a variely of
weapons, gaining lhe following benelils:
lncrease your Slrength OI'Dexlerily score by 1, lo a
maxilllum of 20.
Vou gain proliciency wilh four weapons of your choiee.

