CHAPTER

2:

RACES
"

I

VISITTOONEOfTHE GREATCITIESINTHE
worlds of OUNGEONS& ORAGONSWalerdeep, the Free Cily of Greyhawk, or
even uncanny Sigil, the City of Ooorsoverwhelms lhe senses. Voices chatter in
counlless differenl languages. The smells
of cooking in dozens of differenl cuisines
mingle with lhe odors of crowded slreels and poor
sanitalion. Buildings in myriad architeclural styles
display lhe diverse origins of their inhabilants.
And lhe people lhemselves-people
of varying size,
shape, and coloro dressed in a dazzling speclrum
of slyles and hues-represenl
many differenl races,
from diminulive halflings and stoul dwarves to
majeslically beauliful elves, mingling among a variety
of human ethnicities.
Scattered among lhe members of these more common
races are the lrue exolics: a hulking dragonborn here,
pushing his way lhrough lhe crowd, and a sly liefling
there, lurking in lhe shadows with mischief in her eyes.
A group of gnomes laughs as one of lhem activales a
clever wooden loy lhal moves of ils own accord. Halfelves and half-orcs live and work alongside humans,
without fully belonging to lhe races of eilher of lheir
parenls. And lhere, well oul of lhe sunlighl, is a lone
drow-a fugilive from lhe sublerranean expanse of
the Underdark, trying to make his way in a world
thal fears his kind.

RACIAL TRAITS
The descriplion of each race includes racial traits lhal
are common to members of lhal race. The following
entries appear among lhe lrails of most races.
ABILITY

SCORE INCREASE

Every race increases one or more of a characler's
abilily scores.
AGE

The age entry noles the age when a member of lhe race
is considered an adult, as well as the race's expected
lifespan. This informalion can help you decide how
old your characler is at lhe start of lhe game. Vou
can choose any age for your characler, which could
provide an explanation for some of your ability scores.
For example, if you play a young or very old character,
your age could explain a particularly low Strength or
Conslitulion score, while advanced age could accounl
for a high Inlelligence or Wisdom.
ALIGNMENT

Mosl races have tendencies loward cerlain alignments,
described in this entry. These are nol binding for player
characlers, bul considering why your dwarf is chaolic.
for example, in defiance of lawful dwarf society can help
you better define your characler,
SIZE

CHOOSING

A RACE

Humans are lhe most common people in lhe worlds of
0&0, bul they live and work alongside dwarves, elves,
halflings, and counlless olher fanlaslic species. Your
character belongs lo one of lhese peoples.
Nol every inlelligent race of lhe mulliverse is
appropriale for a player-conlrolled advenlurer. Owarves,
elves, halflings, and humans are the most common
races to produce the sorl of advenlurers who make up
lypical parlies. Oragonborn, gnomes, half-elves, halforcs, and lieflings are less common as adventurers.
Orow, a subrace of elves, are also uncommon.
Your choice of race affects many differenl aspecls of
your character. /t establishes fundamenlal qualities thal
exisl IhroughoUI your characler's adventuring career.
When making lhis decision, keep in mind lhe kind of
character you wanl lO play. For example, a halfling could
be a good choice for a sneaky rogue, a dwarf makes a
lough warrior, and an elf can be a maSler of arcane magic,
Your characler race nol only affecIs your abilily scores
and lrails bul also provides lhe cues for building your
characler's story. Each race's descriplion in lhis chapler
includes information to help you roleplay a characler of
lhal race, including personality, physical appearance,
features of sociely, and racial alignmenl lendencies.
These delails are suggeslions to help you think aboul
your characler; adventurers can deviate widely from lhe
norm for lheir race. /t's worthwhile to consider why your
character is differenl, as a helpful way to think aboul
your characler's background and personalily.

Characlers of mosl races are Medium, a size calegory
including creatures lhal are roughly 4 lo 8 feet la 11.
Members of a few races are Small (belween 2 and 4 feel
la 11),which means lhal cerlain rules of lhe game affecl
lhem differenlly. The mosl importanl of lhese rules
is lhal Small characters have lrouble wielding heavy
weapons, as explained in chapler 6.
SPEED

Your speed delermines how far you can move when
lraveling (chapler 8) and fighling (chapler 9).
LANGUAGES

By virtue of your race, your character can speak, read,
and wrlte cerlain languages. Chapler 4 lisls the mosl
common languages of lhe 0&0 multiverse.
SUBRACES

Some races have subraces. Members of a subrace
have lhe lrails of the parenl race in addition lo lhe
lrails specified for lheir subrace. Relationships among
subraces vary significantly from race lo race and
world to world. In the Oragonlance campaign setting,
for example, mountain dwarves and hill dwarves live
logelher as differenl clans of lhe same people, bul in
the Forgolten Realms, lhey live far aparl in separale
kingdoms and call lhemselves shield dwarves and
gold dwarves, respeclively.

PARTI I RACES

17

SHORT AND STOUT
Bold and hardy, dwarves are known as
skilled warriors, miners, and workers
of stone and melaI. Though lhey sland
well under 5 feel tall, dwarves are so
broad and compael lhal lhey can weigh
as much as a human slanding nearly lwo
feet laller. Their courage and endurance
are also easily a maleh for any of
lhe larger folk.
Owarven skin ranges from deep brown to a paler
hue linged wilh red, bul lhe most eommon shades are
lighl brown or deep lan, like cerlain lones of earlh.
Their hair, worn long bul in simple slyles, is usually
black, gray, or brown, lhough paler dwarves oflen have
red hair. Male dwarves value lheir beards highly and
groom lhem carefully.

LONG MEMORY, LONG GRUDGES

DWARF
"YER LATE, ELF!" CAME THE ROUGH EDGE OF A FAMILIAR

voice. Bruenor Battlehammer

walked up the back of his

deadfoe, disregardingthefact

that the heavy monster lay

on top ofhis elvenfriend.

In spite ofthe added discamfort,

the dwarf's long, pointed, often-broken

nose and gray-

streaked though still-fiery red beard came as a welcame
sight to Drizzt. "Knew I'dfindye

in trouble if I came out

an' lookedforyel"
-R. A. Salvatore, The Crystal Shard
Kingdoms rich in ancienI grandeur, halls carved into the
rools of mountains, lhe echoing of picks and hammers
in deep mines and blazing forges, a commitmenl 10
clan and lradilion, and a burning halred of goblins and
ores-lhese eommon lhreads unile ali dwarves.

18

PART I I RACES

Owarves can live to be more than 400 years old, so lhe
oldesl living dwarves often remember a very differenl
world. For example, some of lhe oldesl dwarves living
in Ciladel Felbarr (in lhe world of lhe Forgotten Realms)
can recall lhe day, more lhan three cenluries ago, when
ores conquered lhe forlress and drove lhem into an exile
lhal lasled over 250 years. This longevity granls lhem a
perspeclive on lhe world lhal shorter-lived races such as
humans and halflings lack.
Owarves are solid and enduring like the mounlains
they love, wealhering lhe passage of cenluries wilh stoic
endurance and little change. They respecl lhe lradilions
of lheir clans, lracing their anceslry back lo lhe
founding of lheir mosl ancienl slrongholds in lhe youth
of lhe world, and don'l abandon those lradilions lighlly.
ParI of lhose traditions is devolion lo lhe gods of lhe
dwarves, who uphold lhe dwarven ideais of induslrious
labor, skill in baltle, and devolion lo lhe forge.
Individual dwarves are determined and loyal, lrue lo
lheir word and decisive in action, somelimes lo lhe poinl
of ~tubbornness. Many dwarves have a strong sense

of justice, and they are slow to forget wrongs they have
suffered. A wrong dane to one dwarf is a wrong dane to
the dwarf's entire dan, so what begins as one dwarf's
hunt for vengeance can become a full-blown dan feudo

CLANS AND KINGDOMS
Dwarven kingdoms stretch deep beneath the mountains
where the dwarves mine gems and precious metais
and forge items of wonder. They love the beauty and
artistry of precious metais and fine jewelry, and in some
dwarves this lave festers into avarice. Whatever wealth
they can't find in their mountains, they gain through
trade. They dislike boats, so enterprising humans and
halflings frequently handle trade in dwarven goods
along water routes. Trustworthy members of other races
are welcome in dwarf settlements, though some areas
are off limits even to them.
The chief unit of dwarven society is the dan, and
dwarves highly value social standing. Even dwarves
who live far from their own kingdoms cherish their dan
identities and affiliations, recognize related dwarves,
and invoke their ancestors' names in oaths and curses.
To be danless is the worst fate that can befall a dwarf.
Dwarves in other lands are typically artisans,
especially weaponsmiths, armorers, and jewelers. Some
become mercenaries ar bodyguards, highly sought after
for their courage and loyalty.

GODS,

GOLD,

AND CLAN

Dwarves who take up the adventuring life might be
motivated bya desire for treasure-for its own sake, for
a specilic purpose, ar even out of an altruistic desire to
help others. Other dwarves are driven by the command
ar inspiration of a deity, a direct calling or simply a
desire to bring glory to one of the dwarf gods. Clan and
ancestry are also important motivators. A dwarf might
seek to restore a dan's lost honor, avenge an ancienl
wrong the dan suffered, ar earn a new place within the
dan after having been exiled. ar a dwarf might search
for the axe wielded bya mighty ancestor, lost on the lield
of battle centuries ago.

SLOW

TO TRUST

Dwarves gel along passably well wilh mosl olher races. "The
difference belween an acquainlance and a friend is aboul a
hundred years," is a dwarf saying lhal mighl be hyperbole,
bul cerlainly poinls lo how diflicull il can be for a member of
a shorl-lived race Iike humans lo eam a dwarf's lrusl.
Elves. "I!'s nol wise lo depend on lhe elves. No lelling whal
an elf will do nexl; when lhe hammer meels lhe orc's head,
lhey're as apllo slart singing as lo pull oul a sword. They're
fiighly and frivolous. Two lhings lo be said for lhem, lhough:
They don'l have many smilhs, bullhe ones lhey have do very
fine work. And when ores ar goblins come slreaming down
oul oflhe mounlains, an elf's good lo have aI your back. Nol
as good as a dwarf, maybe, bul no doubllhey hale lhe ores
as much as we do."
Half/ings. "Sure, lhey're pleasanl folk. Sul show me a
halfiing hera. An empire, a lriumphanl army. Even a lreasure
for lhe ages made by halfiing hands. NOlhing. How can you
lake lhem seriously?"
Humans. "You lake lhe lime lo gel lo know a human, and
by lhen lhe human's on her dealhbed. If you're lucky, she's
gol kin-a daughler ar granddaughler, maybe-who's gol
hands and hearl as good as hers. Tha!'s when you can make
a human friend. And walch lhem gol They sellheir hearts on
somelhing, lhey'll gel il, whelher i!'s a dragon's hoard ar an
empire's lhrone. You have lo admire lhal kind of dedicalion,
even if il gels lhem in lrouble more oflen lhan nol."

~

r

DWARF NAMES
A dwarf's na me is granted by a c1an elder, in accordance
with tradition, Every proper dwarven na me has been
used and reused down through the generations, A
dwarf's name belongs to the c1an, not to the individual.
A dwarf who misuses or brings shame to a c1an name
is stripped of the na me and forbidden by law to use any
dwarven name in its place,
Male Names: Adrik, Alberich, Baern, Barendd, Brottor,
Bruenor, Oain, Oarrak, Oelg, Eberk, Einkil, Fargrim,
Flint, Gardain, Harbek, Kildrak, Morgran, Orsik,
Oskar, Rangrim, Rurik, Taklinn, Thoradin, Thorin,
Tordek, Traubon, Travok, Ulfgar, Veit, Vondal
Female Names: Amber, Artin, Audhild, Bardryn,
Oagnal, Oiesa, Eldeth, Falkrunn, Finellen, Gunnloda,
Gurdis, Helja, Hlin, Kathra, Kristryd, lide, Liftrasa,
Mardred, Riswynn, Sannl, Torbera, Torgga, Vistra
Clan Names: Balderk, Battlehammer, Brawnanvil,
Oankil, Fireforge, Frostbeard, Gorunn, Holderhek,
Ironfist, Loderr, Lutgehr, Rumnaheim, Strakeln,
Torunn, Ungart

DWARF TRAITS
Your dwarf character has an assortment of inborn
abilities, part and parcel of dwarven nature.
Ability Seore Inerease. Your Constitution seore
increases by 2.
Age. Owarves mature at the same rate as humans, but
they're considered young until they reach the age of 50,
On average, they live about 350 years.
Alignment. Most dwarves are lawful, believing firmly
in the benefits of a well-ordered society. They tend
toward good as well, with a strong sense of fair play and
a belief that everyone deserves to share in the benefits of
a just order.
Size. Owarves stand between 4 and 5 feet tall and
average about 150 pounds. Your size is Medium.
Speed. Your base walking speed is 25 feel. Your
speed is not reduced by wearing heavy armor.
Darkvision. Accustomed to life underground, you
have superior vision in dark and dim conditions. Vou
can see in dim light within 60 feet of you as if it were
bright light, and in darkness as if it were dim lighl. Vou
can't discern color in darkness, only shades of gray.
Dwarven Resilienee. Vou have advantage on saving
throws against poison, and you have resistance against
poison damage (explained in chapter 9).
Dwarven Combat Training. Vou have proficiency
with the battleaxe, handaxe, throwing hammer,
and warhammer.

20

PART

I

I

RACES

TooJProficieney. Vou gain proficiency with the
artisan's tools of your choice: smith's tooIs, brewer's
supplies, or mason's tools.
Stoneeunning. Whenever you make an Intelligence
(History) check related to the origin of stonework, you
are considered proficient in the History skill and add
double your proficiency bonus to the check, instead of
your normal proficiency bonus.
Languages. Vou can speak, read, and write Common
and Owarvish. Owarvish is full of hard consonants and
guttural sounds, and those characteristics spill over into
whatever other language a dwarf might speak.
Subraee. Two main subraces of dwarves populate the
worlds of 0&0: hill dwarves and mountain dwarves.
Choose one of these subraces.
HILL DWARF

As a hill dwarf, you have keen senses, deep intuition,
and remarkable resilience. The gold dwarves of Faenln
in their mighty southern kingdom are hill dwarves, as
are the exiled Neidar and the debased Klar of Krynn in
the Oragonlance setting.
Ability Seore Inerease. Your Wisdom score
increases by 1.
Dwarven Toughness. Your hit point maximum
increases by 1, and it increases by 1 every time you
gain a leveI.
MOUNTAIN

DWARF

As a mountain dwarf, you're strong and hardy,
accustomed to a difficult life in rugged terrain. You're
probably on the tall side (for a dwarf), and tend toward
lighter coloration, The shield dwarves of northern
Faerun, as well as the ruling Hylar c1an and the noble
Oaewar c1an of Oragonlance, are mountain dwarves.
Ability Seore Inerease. Your Strength score
increases by 2.
Dwarven Armor Training. Vou have proficiency with
light and medium armor.

••

DUERGAR

In cities deep in the Underdark live the duergar, ar gray
dwarves. These vicious, stealthy slave traders raid lhe surface
world for caplives, lhen sell lheir prey lo lhe olher races of
lhe Underdark. They have innale magical abililies lo beco me
invisible and lo lemporarily grow lo gianl size.

ELF
"I HAVE NEVER IMAGINED SUCH BEAUTY EXISTED,"

Goldmoon said soft!)'. The day's march had been difficult.
but the reward at the end was beyond their dreams.
The companions stood on a high cliff over thefabled
city of Qualinost.
Four slender spires rasefrom the city's corners like glistening spindles, their brilliant white stone marbled with shining

silver. Graceful arches. swoopingfrom spire to spire, soared
through the air. Crafted by ancient dwarven metalsmiths.
they were strongenough to hold the weight of an army,yet
they appeared so delicate that a bird lighting on them might
overthraw the balance, These glistening arches were the
city's on!)' boundaries; there was no wall around Qualinost.
The elven city opened its arms loving!)' to the wilderness.
-Margaret

Weis & Tracy Hickman,
Dragons of Autumn Twilight

Elves are a magical people of otherworldly grace, living
in the world but not entirely part of it. They live in
places of ethereal beauty, in the midst of ancient forests
ar in silvery spires glittering with faerie light, where
soft music drifts through the air and gentle fragrances
waft on the breeze. Elves lave nature and magic, art
and artistry, music and poetry, and the good things
of the world.

females are about the same height, and males are only
marginaIly heavier than females.
Elves' coloration encompasses the normal human
range and also includes skin in shades of copper,
bronze, and almost bluish-white, hair of green ar blue,
and eyes like pools of liquid gold ar silver. Elves have no
facial and little body hair. They favor elegant c10thing in
bright colors, and they enjoy simple yet lovely jewelry,

SLENDER AND GRACEFUL

A

With their unearthly grace and fine features, elves
appear hauntingly beautiful to humans and members
of many other races. They are slightly shorter than
humans on average, ranging from well under 5 feet
tall to just over 6 feet. They are more slender than
humans, weighing only 100 to 145 pounds. Males and

Elves can live weIl over 700 years, giving them a broad
perspective on events that might trouble the shorterlived races more deeply, They are more often amused
than excited, and more likely to be curious than
greedy. They tend to remain aloof and unfazed by petty
happenstance. When p"rs"ing a goal, however, whether

TIMELESS

PERSPECTIVE

PART tRACES
21

adventuring on a mission or learning a new skill or art,
elves can be focused and relentless. They are slow to
make friends and enemies, and even slower to forget
them. They reply to petty insults with disdain and to
serious insults with vengeance.
Like the branches of a young tree, elves are f1exible
in the face of danger. They trust in diplomacy and
compromise to resolve differences before they escalate
to violence. They have been known to retreat from
intrusions into their woodland homes, confident
that they can simply wait the invaders oul. But when
the need arises, elves reveal a stern martial side,
demonstrating skill wilh sword, bow, and strategy.

HIDDEN

WOODLAND

REALMS

Most elves dwell in small forest villages hidden among
the trees. Elves hunt game, gather food, and grow
vegetables, and their skill and magie allow them to
support themselves without the need for clearing and
plowing land. They are talented artisans, crafting finely
worked clothes and art objects. Their contact with
outsiders is usually limited, though a few elves make a
good living by trading crafted items for metais (which
thcy have no interest in mining).
Elves encountered outside their own lands are
commonly traveling minstrels, artists, or sages. Human
nobles compete for lhe services of elf instructors to
teach swordplay or magie to their children.

EXPLORATION

AND ADVENTURE

EI\'es lake up advenluring out of wanderlust. Since
they are so long-lived, they can enjoy centuries of
exploration and discovery. They dislike lhe pace of
human society, whieh is regimenled from day lo day but
constantly changing over deeades, so lhey find careers
that let them travei freely and set their own pace. Elves
also enjoy exercising their martial prowess or gaining
greatcr magical power, and adventuring allo\Vs them
PART

22

I

I

RACES

to do so. Some mlght join with rebels fighting against
oppression, and others might become champions of
moral causes.

ELF NAMES
Elves are considered children until they declare
themselves adults, some time after the hundredth
birthday, and before this period they are called
by child names.
On declaring adulthood, an elf selects an adult name,
although those who knew him or her as a youngster
mlght continue to use the child name. Each elf's adult
na me is a uni que creation, though It might reflect
the names of respected individuaIs or other family
members. Little distinction exists between male
names and female names; the groupings here reflect
only general tendencies. In addition, every elf bears a
family na me, typieally a comblnation of other Elvish
words. Some elves traveling among humans translate
their family names into Common, but others retain the
Elvish version.
Child Names: Ara, Bryn, Del, Eryn, Faen, Innil,
Lael, Mella, Naill, Naeris, Phann, Rael, Rinn, Sai,
Syllin, Thia, Vali
Male Adult Names: Adran, Aelar, Aramil, Arannis,
Aust, Beiro, Berrian, Carrie, Enialis, Erdan, Erevan,
Galinndan, Hadarai, Heian, Himo. Immeral, Ivellios,
Laucian, Mindartis, Paelias, Peren, Quarion, Riardon,
Rolen, Soveliss, Thamior, Tharivol, Theren, Varis

'.;,.

HAUGHTY

BUT GRACIOUS

Although they can be haughty, elves are generally gracious
even to those who fali short of their high expectationswhich is most non.elves. 5till, they can find good in just
about anyone.
Dwarves. "Dwarves are dull, c1umsy oafs. But what they
lack in humor, sophistication, and manners, they make up in
valor. And I must admit, their best smiths produce art that
approaches elven quality."
Haljlings. "Halflings are people of simple pleasures, and
that is not a quality to scorn. lhey're good folk, they care
for each other and tend their gardens, and they have proven
themselves tougher than they seem when the need arises."
Humans. "Ali that haste, their ambition and drive to
accomplish something before their brieflives pass awayhuman endeavors seem 50 futile sometimes. But then
you look at what they have accomplished, and you have to
appreciate their achievements. If only they could slow down
and learn some refinement."

~

,

Female Adult Names: Adrie, Althaea, Anastrianna,
Andraste, Antinua, Bethrynna, Birel, Caelynn,
Orusilia, Enna, Felosial, lelenia,jelenneth, Keyleth,
Leshanna, Lia, Meriele, Mialee, Naivara, Quelenna,
Quillathe, Sariel, Shanairra, Shava, Silaqui,
Theirastra, Thia, Vadania, Valanthe, Xanaphia
Fami1y Names (Common Translations): Amakiir
(Gemflower), Amastacia (Starflower), Galanodel
(Moonwhisper), Holimion (Oiamonddew), IIphelkiir
(Gemblossom), Liadon (Silverfrond), Meliamne
(Oakenheel), Nailo (Nightbreeze), Siannodel
(Moonbrook), Xiloscient (Goldpetal)

ELF TRAITS
Your elf character has a variety of natural abilities, the
result of thousands of years of elven refinemenl.
Ability Score Increase. Your Oexterity score
increases by 2.
Age. AIthough elves reach physical maturity at about
the same age as humans, the elven understanding of
adulthood goes beyood physical growth to eocompass
worldly experience. Ao elf typically c1aims adulthood
aod ao adult name arouod the age of 100 aod cao live
to be 750 years old.
Alignment. Elves love freedom, variety, aod selfexpressioo, so they lean stroogly toward the geotler
aspects of chaos. They value aod protect others'
freedom as well as their owo, aod they are more
often good thao 001. The drow are ao exceptioo; their
exile ioto the Uoderdark has made them vicious aod
daogerous. Orow are more often evil thao oot.
Size. Elves raoge from under 5 to over 6 feet tall aod
have sleoder builds. Your size is Medium.
Speed. Your base walkiog speed is 30 feel.
Darkvision. Accustomed to twilit forests and the oight
sky, you have superior vision io dark aod dim cooditioos.
Vou cao see io dim light withio 60 feet of you as if it
were bright light, aod io darkness as if it were dim lighl.
Vou cao'l discero color io darkoess, ooIy shades of gray. ,
Keen Senses. Vou have proficieocy io the
Perceptioo skill.
Fey Ancestry. Vou have advaolage 00 saviog throws
agaiost beiog charmed, and magic cao't put you to sleep.

Trance. Elves doo't need to sleep. Ioslead, lhey
meditate deeply, remainiog semicooscious, for 4
hours a day. (The Commoo word for such meditatioo
is "traoce.") While meditatiog, you cao dream after a
fashioo; such dreams are actually meotal exercises that
have beco me reflexive through years of practice. Afler
resliog io lhis way, you gaio lhe same beoefit that a
humao does from 8 hours of sleep.
Languages. Vou cao speak, read, and write Common
aod Elvish. Elvish is fluid, wilh subtle iotonatioos aod
iotricate grammar. Elveo literature is rich aod varied,
aod their soogs aod poems are famous among other
races. Maoy bards learo lheir laoguage so lhey cao add
Elvish ballads lo lheir repertoires.
Subrace. Aocieot divides amoog the elveo people
resulled in lhree maio subraces: high elves, wood elves,
aod dark elves, who are commooly called drow. Choose
ooe of lhese subraces. lo some worlds, these subraces
are divided slill further (such as lhe suo e1ves and mooo
elves of the Forgotteo Realms), so if you wish, you can
choose a oarrower subrace.
HIGH ELF

As a high elf, you have a keeo mind and a mastery of
at least lhe basics of magic. In many of the worlds
of 0&0, lhere are two kinds of high elves. Ooe lype
(which includes lhe gray e1ves aod valley elves of
Greyhawk, the Silvaoesti of Oragoolaoce, and lhe
sun elves of lhe Forgotteo Realms) is haughty and
reclusive, believing lhemselves to be superior lo
ooo-elves and even other elves. The other type
(iocludiog the high elves of Greyhawk. the
Qualinesli of Oragonlance, and the moon elves
of the Forgotteo Realms) are more common
and more friendly, and oflen encouolered
among humans and olhe r races.
The sun elves of Faeruo (also called gold
elves or sunrise elves) have bronze skin and
hair of copper, black, or golden blood. Thcir
eyes are golden, silver, or black. Moon elves (also
called silver elves or gray elves) are much paler,
with alabasler skio somelimes tioged wilh blue.
They oflen have hair of silver-while, black, or blue,
but various shades of blond, brown, and red are
not uncommon. Their eyes are blue or green and
flecked with gold.
Ability Score Increase. Your lotelligeoce score
iocreases by I.
ElfWeapon Training. Vou have proficiency with
lhe longsword, shortsword, shortbow, and longbow.

P'\RTl

(t-S

Cantrip. Vou know one Canlrip of your choice from
lhe wizard spelllisl. Inlelligence is your spellcasling
abilily for il.
',."
Extra Language. Vou can speak, read, and wrile one
exlra language of your choice.
WOOD ELF

As a wood elf, you have keen senses and inluilion, and
your fleel feel carry you quickly and sleallhily lhrough
your nalive foresls. This calegory includes lhe wild
elves (grugach) of Greyhawk and lhe Kagonesli of
Dragonlance, as well as lhe races called wood elves in
Greyhawk and lhe Forgolten Realms. [n Faenln, wood
elves (also called wild elves. green elves, or foresl elves)
are reclusive and dislrusling of non-elves.
Wood elves' skin lends lo be copperish in hue,
somelimes wilh lraces of green. Their hair lends loward
browns and blacks, bul il is occasionally blond or
copper-colored. Their eyes are green, brown, or hazel.
Ability Score Increase. Your Wisdom score
increases by 1.
ElfWeapon Training. Vou have proficiency wilh lhe
longsword, shorlsword, shorlbow, and longbow.
F1eet ofFoot. Your base walking speed
increases lo 35 feel.
Mask ofthe Wild. Vou can altempllo hide even when
you are only lighlly obscured by foliage, heavy rain,
falling snow, misl, and olher nalural phenomena.

DARK ELF (DROW)

Descended from an earlier subrace of dark-skinned
elves; lhedrow were banished from lhe surface world
for following lhe goddess Lollh down lhe palh lo
evil and corruplion. Now lhey have builllheir own
civilizalion in lhe deplhs of lhe Underdark, palterned
afler lhe Way of Lollh. Also called dark elves. lhe drow
have black skin lhal resemb[es polished obsidian and
slark while ar pale yellow hair. They commonly have
very pale eyes (so pale as lObe mislaken for while) in
shades of lilac, silver, pink, red, and blue. They lend lo
be smaller and lhinner lhan mosl elves.
Drow advenlurers are rare, and lhe race does nol exisl
in ali worlds. Check wilh your Dungeon Masler lo see
if you can play a drow characler.
Ability Score Increase. Your Charisma score
increases by 1.
Superior Darkvision. Your darkvision has a
radius of 120 feel.
SunJight Sensitivity. Vou have disadvanlage on altack
rolls and on Wisdom (Perceplion) checks lhal rely on
sighl when you, lhe largel of your altack, ar whalever
you are trying to perceive is in direcl sunlighl.
Drow Magic. Vou know lhe dancing Jights canlrip.
When you reach 3rd levei, you can casllhe faerie tire
spell once per day. When you reach 51h levei, you can
also casl lhe darkness spell once per day. Charisma is
your spellcasling abilily for lhese spells.
Drow Weapon Training. Vou have proficiency with
rapiers, shorlswords, and hand crossbows.
4
THE

,
DARKNEss

OF THE DRow

Were il nol for one renowned exceplion, lhe race of drow
would be universally reviled. lo mosl, lhey are a race of
demon-worshiping marauders dwelling in lhe sublerranean
deplhs of lhe Underdark, emerging only on lhe blackesl
nighls lo pillage and slaughler lhe surface dwellers lhey
despi se. lheir sociely is depraved and preoccupied wilh lhe
favor of Lollh, lheir spider-goddess, who sanclions murder
and lhe exlerminalion of enlire families as noble houses
vie for posilion.
Yel one drow, alleasl, broke lhe mold. In lhe world of lhe
Forgotten Realms, Drizzl Do'Urden, ranger of lhe North, has
proven his qualily as a good-hearted defender of lhe weak
and innocent. Rejecling his herilage and adrift in a world lhal
looks upon him wilh lerror and loalhing, Drizzl is a model
for lhose few drow who follow in his foolsleps, lrying lo find
a life apart from lhe evil sociely oflheir Underdark homes.
Drow grow up believing lhal surface-dwelling races are
inferior, worlhless excepl as slaves. Drow who develop a
conscience or find il necessary lo cooperale wilh members of
olher races find il hard lo overcome lhal prejudice, especially
when lhey are 50 often on lhe receiving end of halred.

The comforts of home are the goals of most halflings'
lives: a place to settle in peace and quiet, far from
marauding monsters and clashing armies; a blazing tire
and a generous meal; fine drink and fine conversation.
Though some halflings live out their days in remote .
agricultural communities, others form nomadic bands
that travei constantly, lured by the open road and the
wide horizon to discover the wonders of new lands and
peoples. But even these wanderers love peace, food,
hearth, and home, though home might be a wagon
jostling along an dirt road or a raft floating downriver.

SMALL ANO PRACTICAL

HALFLING
REGIS THE HALFLING,

THE ONLY ONE OF HIS KIND FOR

hundreds ofmiles in a1lY direction, /ocked hisfmgers behind his head and /eaned back against the mos~ b/anket
of the tree trunk. Regis was short, even by the standards
of his diminutive roce, with the fluff of his curfy brawn
/ocks barefy cresting the three-foot mark, but his be/fy was

The diminutive halflings survive in a world full of larger
creatures by avoiding notice or, barring that, avoiding
offense. Standing about 3 feet tall, they appear re1atively
harmless and so have managed to survive for centuries
in the shadow of empires and on the edges of wars and
political strife. They are inclined to be stout, weighing
between 40 and 45 pounds.
Halflings' skin ranges from tan to pale with a ruddy
cast, and their hair is usually brown or sandy brown
and wavy. They have brown or hazel eyes. Halfling men
often sport long sideburns, but beards are rare among
them and mustaches even more so. They like to wear
simple, comfortable, and practical clothes, favoring
bright colors.
Halfling practicality extends beyond their clothing.
They're concerned with basic needs and simple
pleasures and have little use for ostentation. Even the
wealthiest of halflings keep their treasures locked in a
cellar rather than on display for ali to see. They have
a knack for finding the most straightforward solution
to a problem, and have little patience for dithering.

ampfy thickened by his love of a good mea/, ar severa/, as
the opportunities

presented themse/ves. The crooked stick

that served as hisfishingpole

rase up above him, c/enched

between two ofhis toes, and hungout

over the quiet /ake,

mirrared perfectfy in the glas~ surface of Maer Dua/don.
-R.A. Salvatore, The Crysta/ Shard

PART I

I

RACES

KINO ANO CURIOUS
Halflings are an affable and cheerful people. They
cherish the bonds of family and friendship as well
as the comforts of hearth and home, harboring few
dreams of gold or glory. Even adventurers among
them usually venture into the world for reasons of

AFFABLE

community, friendship, wanderlust, ar curiosity. They
lave discovering new things, even sim pie things, such
as an exotic food ar an unfamiliar style of c1othing.
Halflings are easily moved to pity and hate to see any
living thing suffer. They are generous, happily sharing
what they have even in lean times.

BLEND INTO THE CROWD
Halflings are adept at fitting into a community of
humans, dwarves, ar elves, making themselves valuable
and weJcome. The combination of their inherent stealth
and their unassuming nature helps halflings to avoid
unwanted attention.
Halflings work readily with others, and they are loyal
to their friends, whether halfling ar otherwise. They can
display remarkable ferocity when their friends, families,
ar communities are threatened.

PASTORAL PLEASANTRIES
Most halflings live in small, peaceful communities with
large farms and well-kept graves. They rarely build
kingdoms of their own ar even hold much land beyond
their quiet shires. They typically don't recognize any
sort of halfling nobility ar royalty, instead looking to
family elders to guide them. Families preserve their
traditional ways despite the rise and fali of empires.
Many halflings live among other races, where the
halflings' hard work and loyal outlook offer them
abundant rewards and creature comforts. Some halfling
communities travei as a way of life, driving wagons ar
guiding boats from place to place and maintaining no
permanent home.

AN D POSITIVE

Halflings lry lo gel along wilh everyone else and are loalh lo
make sweeping generalizalions-especially
negative ones.
Dwarves. "Dwarves make loyal friends, and you can counl
on lhem lo keep lheir word. Bul would il hurt lhem lo smile
once in a whilel"
Elves. "They're 50 beauliful! Their faces, lheir music, lheir
grace and alI. 11'5 like they slepped oul of a wonderful dream.
Bul lhere's no lelling what's going on behind lheir smiling
faces-surely more lhan lhey ever let on."
Humans. "Humans are a 101 like us, really. AI leasl some
of Ih em are. 51ep oul of lhe caslles and keeps, go lalk lo lhe
farmers and herders and you'll find good, solid folk. Nol lhal
lhere's anylhing wrong wilh lhe barons and soldiers-you
have lo admire lheir conviclion. And by prolecling lheir own
lands, lhey prolecl us as well."

••

EXPLORING

•••
OPPORTUNITIES

Halflings usually seI out on the adventurer's path lo
defend lheir communities, support their friends, or
explore a wide and wonder-filled world. For them,
adventuring is less a career than an opportunity or
sometimes a necessity.

HALFLING

NAMES

A halfling has a given name, a family name, and possibly
a nickname. Family names are often nicknames that
stuck so tenaciously they have been passed down
through the generations.
Male Names: Alton, Ander, Cade, Corrin, Eldon, Errich,
Finnan, Garret, Lindal, Lyle, Merric, Milo, Osborn,
Perrin, Reed, Roscoe, Wellby
Female Names: Andry, Bree, Callie, Cora, Euphemia,
jillian, Kithri, Lavinia, Lidda, Merla, Nedda, Paela,
Portia, Seraphina, Shaena, Trym, Vani, Verna
Family Names: Brushgather, Goodbarrel, Greenbottle,
High-hill, Hilltopple, Leagallow, Tealeaf, Thorngage,
Tosscobble, Underbough

PART

I

I

RACES

27

HALFLING

TRAITS

Your halfling character has a number of traits in
common with ali other halflings.
AbiJity Score Increase. Your Dexterity score
increases by 2.
Age. A halfling reaches adulthood at the age of
20 and generally lives into the middle of his or her
second century.
Alignment. Most halflings are lawful good. As a rule,
they are good-hearted and kind, hate to see others in
pain, and have no tolerance for oppression. They are
also very orderly and traditional, leaning heavily on
the support of their community and the comfort of
their old ways.
Size. Halflings average about 3 feet tall and weigh
about 40 pounds. Your size is Small.
Speed. Your base walking speed is 25 feel.
Lucky. When you roll a 1 on an attack roll, ability
check, or saving throw, you can reroll the die and must
use the new roll.
Brave. Vou have advantage on saving throws against
being frightened.
Halfling Nimbleness. Vou can move through the
space of any creature that is of a size larger than yours.

Languages. Vou can speak, read, and write Common
and Halfling. The Halfling language isn't secret, but
halflings are loath to share it with others. They write
very little, so they don't have a rich body of literature.
Their oral tradition. however, is very strong. Almost ali
halflings speak Common to converse with the people
in whose lands they dwell or through which they .
are traveling.
Subrace. The two main kinds of halfling. lightfoot and
stout, are more like closely related families than true
suhraces. Choose one of these subraces.
LIGHTFOOT

As a lightfoot halfling, you can easily hide from notice,
even using other people as cover. You're inclined to be
affable and get along well with others. In the Forgotten
Realms, lightfoot halflings have spread the farthest and
thus are the most common variety.
Lightfoots are more prone to wanderlust than other
halflings. and often dwell alongside other races or take
up a nomadic life. In the world of Greyhawk. these
halflings are called hairfeet or tallfellows.
AbiJity Score Increase. Your Charisma score
increases by 1.
Naturally Stealthy. Vou can attempt to hide even
when you are obscured only by a creature that is at least
one size larger than you.
STOUT

As a stout halfling. you're hardier than average and have
some resistance to poison. Some say that stouts have
dwarven blood. In the Forgotten Realms, these halflings
are called stronghearts. and they're most common
in the south.
AbiJity Score Increase. Your Constitution score
increases by 1.
Stout Resilience. Vou have advantage on saving
throws against poison, and you have resistance
against poison damage.

PART I

I

RACES

•

HUMAN
THESE WERE THE STORIES OF A RESTLESS PEOPLE WHO

long ago took to the seas and rivers in longboats.jirst

to

pillage and terrorize, then to settle. Yet there was an energy.
a love of adventure. that sangfrom

every page. Long into

the night Liriel read. lighting candle after precious candle.
She'd never given much thought to humans. but these
storiesfascinated

her. In theseyellowed

pages were tales of

bold heroes. strange andjierce animais. mighty primitive gods.
and a magic that was part andfabric ofthat distant land.
-Elaine

Cunningham.

Daughterofthe

Drow

In the reckonings of most worlds. humans are the
youngest of the common races. late to arrive on the
world scene and short-lived in comparison to dwarves.
elves. and dragons. Perhaps it is because of their shorter
lives that they strive to achieve as much as they can in
the years they are given. Or maybe they feel they have
something to prove to the elder races. and that's why
they build their mighty empires on the foundation of
conquest and trade. Whatever drives them. humans
are the innovators. the achievers. and the pioneers
of the worlds.

A

BROAD SPECTRUM

With their penchant for migration and conquest.
humans are more physically diverse than other common
races. There is no typical humano An individual can
stand from 5 feet to a little over 6 feet tall and weigh
fram 125 to 250 pounds. Human skin shades range
fram nearly black to very pale. and hair colors from
black to blond (curly. kinky. or straight); males might
sport facial hair that is sparse or thick. A lot of humans
have a dash of nonhuman blood. revealing hints of elf.
ore, or other lineages. Humans reach adulthood in their
late teens and rarely live even a single century.

VARIETY IN ALL THINGS
Humans are the most adaptable and ambitious people
among the common races. They have widely varying
tastes, morais, and customs in the many different lands
where they have settled. When they settle, though,
they stay: they build cities to last for the ages, and
great kingdoms that can persist for long centuries. An
individual human might have a relatively short life span,
but a human nation or culture preserves traditions
with origins far beyond the reach of any single human's
memory. They live fully in the present-making
them
well suited to the adventuring life-but also plan for the
future, striving to leave a lasting legacy. Individually and
as a group, humans are adaptable opportunists, and
they stay alert to changing political and social dynamics.
PART

I

I

RACES

EVERYONE'S

SECONO-BEST

FRIENOS

Just as readily as they mix with each other, humans mingle
with members of other races. They get along with almost
everyone, though they might not be close to many. Humans
serve as ambassadors,
diplomats,
magistrates,
merchants,
and functionaries
of ali kinds.
Dwa,ves. "They're stout folk, stalwart friends, and true to
their word. Their greed for gold is their downfall, though."
Elves. "ll's best not to wander into elven woods. They don't
like intruders, and you'll as likely be bewitched as peppered
with arrows. 5till, if an elf can get past that damned racial
pride and actually treat you like an equal, you can leam a lot
from them."
Ha/flings. "ll's hard to beat a meal in a halfling home, as
long as you don't crack your head on the ceiling-good
food
and good stories in front of a nice, warm fire. Ifhalflings had
a shred of ambition, they might really amount to something."

~

~

LASTING INSTITUTIONS
Where a single elf or dwarf might take on the
responsibility of guarding a speciallocation or a
powerful secret, humans found sacred orders and
institutions for such purposes. While dwarf c1ans and
halfling elders pass on the ancient traditions to each
new generation, human temples, governments, Iibraries,
and codes of law fix their lradilions in lhe bedrock of
history. Humans dream of immorlality, but (excepl for
lhose few who seek undeath or divine ascension to
escape dealh's c1utches) they achieve il by ensuring that
they will be remembered when lhey are gone.
Allhough some humans can be xenophobic, in
generallheir societies are inclusive. Human lands
welcome large numbers of nonhumans compared lo the
proporlion of humans who live in nonhuman lands.

EXEMPLARS OF AMBITION
Humans who seek advenlure are lhe mosl daring and
ambilious members of a daring and ambilious race.
They seek to earn glory in the eyes of lheir fellows
by amassing power, wealth, and fame. More than
olhe r people, humans champion causes rather lhan
lerritories or groups.

HUMAN

NAMES AND ETHNICITIES

Having so much more variely than olher cullures,
humans as a whole have no typical names. Some human

PART

3°

t

I

RACES

parents give their children names from olher languages,
such as Dwarvish or Elvish (pronounced more or less
correctly), bul mosl parenls give names that are Iinked
lo their region's cullure or lo lhe naming lraditions of
their ancestors.
The malerial cullure and physical characleristics
of humans can change wildly from region lo region.
In the Forgolten Realms, for example, lhe c101hing,
archileclure, cuisine, music, and Iilerature are different
in lhe norlhwestern lands of lhe Silver Marches than
in dislanl Turmish or Impillur to the easl-and even
more dislinclive in far-off Kara-Tur. Human physical
characleristics, lhough, vary according lOlhe ancient
migrations of lhe earliesl humans, so lhallhe humans
of the Silver Marches have every possible varialion of
coloralion and features.
In the Forgotten Realms, nine human elhnic groups
are widely recognized, lhough over a dozen olhers are
found in more localized areas of Faerun. These groups,
and lhe lypical names of lheir members, can be used as
inspiralion no matter which world your human is in.
CALISHITE

Shorler and slighler in build than mos I olher humans,
Calishites have dusky brown skin, hair, and eyes.
They're found primarily in soulhwest Faerun.
Calishite Names: (Male) Aseir, Bardeid, Haseid.
Khemed. Mehmen. Sudeiman, Zasheir; (female)
Alala, Ceidil. Hama, Jasmal, Meilil, Seipora, Yasheira,
Zasheida; (surnames) Basha, Dumein,Jassan, Khalid.
Moslana. Pashar, Rein
CHONDATHAN

Chondalhans are slender, lawny-skinned folk wilh
brown hair that ranges from almosl blond lo almost
black. Most are tall and have green or brown eyes,
but lhese trails are hardly universal. Humans of
Chondalhan descenl dominale the centrallands of
Faerun, around the Inner Sea.

Chondathan Names: (Male) Darvin, Dorn, Evendur,
Gorstag, Grim, Helm, Malark, Morn, Randal,
Stedd; (female) Arveene, Esvele, jhessail, Kerri,
Lureene, Miri, Rowan, Shandri, Tessele; (surnames)
Amblecrown, Buckman, Dundragon, Evenwood,
Greycastle, Tallstag

SHOU
The Shou are the most numerous and powerful ethnic
groJ in Kara-Tur, far to the east of Faerún. They are
yellowish-bronze in hue, with black hair and dark
eyes. Shou surnames are usually presented before
the given name.

DAMARAN

Shou Names: (Male) An, Chen, Chi, Fai, jiang, Jun,
Lian, Long, Meng, On, Shan, Shui, Wen; (female)
Bai, Chao,jia, Lei, Mei, Qiao, Shui, Tai; (surnames)
Chien, Huang, Kao, Kung, Lao, Ling, Mei, Pin, Shin,
Sum, Tan, Wan

Found primarily in the northwest of Faerún, Damarans
are of moderate height and build, with skin hues
ranging from tawny to fair. Their hair is usually brown
ar black, and their eye colar varies widely, though brown
is most common.
Damaran Names: (Male) Bar, Fadei, Glar, Grigor,
Igan, Ivor, Kosef, MivaI, Orei, Pavel, Sergor; (female)
Alethra, Kara, Katernin, Mara, Natali, Olma, Tana,
Zora; (surnames) Bersk, Chernin, Dotsk, Kulenov,
Marsk, Nemetsk, Shemov, Starag
ILLUSKAN

p

TETHYRIAN

Widespread along the entire Sword Coast at the
western edge of Faerún, Tethyrians are of medium build
and height, with dusky skin that tends to grow fairer
the farther north they dwell. Their hair and eye colar
varies widely, but brown hair and blue eyes are the most
common. Tethyrians primarily use Chondathan names.

IIluskans are tall, fair-skinned folk with blue ar steely
gray eyes. Most have raven-black hair, but those who
inhabit the extreme northwest have blond, red, ar
light brown hair.

TURAMI

I1Iuskan Names: (Male) Ander, Blath, Bran, Frath,
Geth, Lander, Luth, Malcer, Stor, Taman, Urth;
(female) Amafrey, Betha, Cefrey, Kethra, Mara, Olga,
Silifrey, Westra; (surnames) Brightwood, Helder.
Hornraven, Lackman, Stormwind. Windrivver

Turami Names: (Male) Anton, Diero. Marcon, Pieron,
Rimardo, Romero, Salazar, Umbero; (female) Balama,
Dona, Faila,jalana, Luisa, Marta, Quara, Selise,
Vonda; (surnames) Agosto, Astorio, Calabra, Domine,
Falone, Marivaldi, Pisacar, Ramondo

MULAN

HUMAN TRAITS

Dominant in the eastern and southeastern shores of
the lnner Sea, the Mulan are generally tall, slim, and
amber-skinned, with eyes of hazel ar brown. Their hair
ranges from black to dark brown, but in the lands where
the Mulan are most prominent, nobles and many other
Mulan shave of[ ali their hair.
Mulan Names: (Male) Aoth, Bareris, Ehput-Ki,
Kethoth, Mumed, Ramas, So-Kehur, Thazar-De,
Urhur; (female) Arizima, Chathi, Nephis, Nulara,
Murithi, Sefris, Thola, Umara, Zolis; (surnames)
Ankhalab, Anskuld, Fezim, Hahpet, Nathandem,
Sepret, Uuthrakt
RASHEMI

Most often found east of the Inner Sea and often
intermingled with the Mulan, Rashemis tend to be short,
stout, and muscular. They usually have dusky skin, dark
eyes, and thick black hair.
Rashemi Names: (Male) Borivik, Faurgar,jandar,
Kanithar, Madislak, Ralmevik, Shaumar, Vladislak;
(female) Fyevarra, Hulmarra, Immith, Imzel,
Navarra, Shevarra, Tammith, Yuldra; (surnames)
Chergoba, Dyernina, Iltazyara, Murnyethara,
Stayanoga, Ulmokina

Native to the southern shore of the Inner Sea, the
Turami people are generally tall and muscular, with
dark mahogany skin, curly black hair, and dark eyes.

It's hard to make generalizations about humans, but
your human character has these traits.
Ability Score Increase. Your ability scores each
increase by I.
Age. Humans reach adulthood in their late teens and
live less than a century.
AJignment. Humans tend toward no
particular alignment. The best and the worst are
found among them.
Size. Humans vary widely in height and build, from
barely 5 feet to well over 6 feet tall. Regardless of your
position in that range. your size is Medium.
Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 fee!.
Languages. Vou can speak, read, and write Common
and one extra language of your choice. Humans typically
learn the languages of other peoples they deal with,
including obscure dialects. They are fond of sprinkling
their speech with words borrowed from other tongues:
Orc curses, Elvish musical expressions, Dwarvish
military phrases, and so on.

••

VARIANT

HUMAN

••

TRAITS

If your eampaign uses the optional feat rules fram ehapter 5,
your Dungeon Master might allow these varianttraits, ali of
whieh replaee the human's Ability Seore Inerease trai!.
Ability Score Increase. Two different ability seores of your
ehoiee inerease by l.
Skills. Vou gain profieieney in one skill ofyour ehoiee.
Feat. Vou gain one feat of your ehoiee.

PART 1

RACES

3'

For al/ her life, Farideh had known that reading her
father'sface

was a skill she'd beenfortunate

to learn. A

human who couldn't spot the shift of her eyes or Havilar's
would certain(y see on(y the indifference of a dragon in
Clanless Mehen'sface.

But the shift of scales, the arch of a

ridge, the set of his eyes, the gape of his teeth-her father's
face spoke volumes.
But every scale of it, this time, seemed complete(y stil/the indifference of a dragon, even to Farideh.
-Erin

M. Evans, TheAdversary

Born of dragons, as their na me proclaims, the
dragonborn walk proudly through a world that greets
them with fearful incomprehension. Shaped by draconic
gods OI' the dragons themselves, dragonborn originally
hatched from dragon eggs as a unique race, combining
the best attributes of dragons and humanoids. Some
dragonborn are faithful servants to true dragons, others
form the ranks of soldiers in great wars, and still others
find themselves adrift, with no clear calling in life.

PROUD DRAGON KIN

DRAGONBORN
HER FATHER STOOD ON THE FIRST OF THE THREE STAIRS

that led dawnfrom

the parta I, unmoving. The scales of his

face had grown paler around the edges, but Clanless Mehen
stil/ looked as if he could wrestle down a dire bear himseif. Hisfamiliar wel/-worn armor was gone, replaced by
violet-tinted scale armor with bright silvery tracings. There
was a blazon on his arm as wel/, the mark of someforeign
house. The sword at his back was the same, though, the one
he had carried since even before he hadfound
in swaddling at the gates of Arush Vayem.

32

PART 1

I RACES

the twins left

Dragonborn look very much like dragons standing erect
in humanoid form, though they lack wings or atai!. The
first dragonborn had scales of vibrant hues matching
the colors of their dragon kin, but generations of
interbreeding have created a more uniform appearance.
Their small, fine scales are usually brass or bronze
in colar, sometimes ranging to scarlet, rust, gold, ar
copper-green. They are tall and strongly built, often
standing close to 6'h feet tall and weighing 300 pounds
ar more. Their hands and feet are strong, talonlike
claws with three fingers and a thumb on each hand.
The blood of a particular type of dragon runs
very strong through some dragonborn clans. These
dragonborn often boast scales that more closely match
those of their dragon ancestor-bright
red, green, blue,
or white, lustrous black, ar gleaming metallic gold,
silver, brass, copper, or bronze.

UNCOMMON

SELF-SUFFICIENT

CLANS

To any dragonborn.
the dan is more important than
life itself. Dragonborn
owe their devotion and respect
to their dan above ali e1se, even the gods. Each
dragonborn's
conduct reflects on the honor of his or her
dan, and bringing dishonor to the dan can result in
expulsion and exile. Each dragonborn
knows his or her
station and duties within the dan, and honor demands
maintaining
the bounds of that position.
A continuaI drive for self-improvement
reflects the
self-sufficiency of the race as a whole. Dragonborn
value
skill and excellence in ali endeavors. They hate to fai!.
and they push themselves to extreme efforts before they
give up on something. A dragonborn
holds mastery of
a particular skill as a lifetime goal. Members of other
races who share the same commitment
find it easy to
earn the respect of a dragonborn.
Though ali dragonborn
strive to be self-sufficient,
they recognize that help is sometimes needed in difficult
situations. But the best source for such heJp is the
dan, and when a dan needs help. it turns to another
dragonborn
dan before seeking aid from other racesor even fram the gods.

DRAGONBORN

NAMES

Dragonborn
have personal names given at birth,
but they put their dan names first as a mark Df
honor. A chi!dhood na me or nickname is often used
among dutchmates
as a descriptive term or a term
of endearment.
The name might recall an event or
center on a habit.

RACES

lhe dragonborn and the rest ofthe raees in this ehapter are
uneommon. lhey don't exist in every worid of D&D, and
even where they are found. they are less widespread than
dwarves. elves. halAings. and humans.
In the cosmopolitan eities ofthe D&D multiverse, most
peopie hardly look twiee at members of even the most
exotie raees. But the small towns and villages that dot
the countryside are different. lhe common folk aren't
accustomed to seeing members ofthese races, and they
reaet accordingly.
Dragonborn. Irs easy to assume that a dragonborn is a
monster, especially ifhis or her scaies betray a ehromatic
heritage. Unless the dragonborn starts breathing fire and
causing destruction. though, peopie are likely to respond
with eaution rather than outright fear.
Gnome. Gnomes don't look like a threat and ean quickly
disarm suspieion with good humor. lhe eommon folk are
often eurious about gnomes, likely never having seen one
before. but they are rarely hostile or fearful.
HalfEIf. Although many people have never seen a haif-elf.
virtually everyone knows they exist. A half.elf stranger's
arrival is followed by gossip behind the half.elf's baek and
stoien glanees aeross the eommon room, rather than any
confrontation ar open curiosity.

HalfOrc. Irs usually safe to assume that a half.ore is
belligerent and quiek to anger, so peopie wateh themselves
around an unfamiliar half-ore. Shopkeepers might
surreptitiously hide valuable or fragile goods when a haif-ore
comes in. and peopie slowly clear out of a tavern, assuming a
fight will break out soon.
riefling. Haif.ores are greeted with a praetieal caution, but
tieAings are the subjeet of supernatural fear. lhe evil of their
heritage is plainly visibie in their features. and as far as most
people are eoneerned, a tieAing eould very well be a devil
straight from the Nine Hells. People might make warding
signs as a tieAing approaehes, eross the street to avoid
passing near, or bar shop doors before a tieAing ean enter.

Male Names: Arjhan. Balasar. Bharash, Donaar, Ghesh.
Heskan, Kriv. Medrash. Mehen. Nadarr. Pandjed,
Patrin, Rhogar, Shamash. Shedinn. Tarhun. Torinn
Female Names: Akra. Biri. Daar. Farideh, Harann.
HaviJar, Jheri, Kava, Korinn. Mishann, NaJa, Perra,
Raiann. Sora. Surina. Thava, Uadjit

33

Childhood Names: Climber. Earbender. Leaper. Pious.
Shieldbiter. Zealous
Clan Names: Clethtinthiallor. Daardendrian. Delmirev.
Drachedandion. Fenkenkabradon. Kepeshkmolik.
Kerrhylon. Kimbatuul. Linxakasendalor. Myastan.
Nemmonis. Norixius. Ophinshtalajiir. Prexijandilin.
Shestendeliath. Turnuroth. Verthisathurgiesh. Yarjerit

DRAGONBORN

TRAITS

ANCESTRY

Dragon

Damage Type

Brealh Weapon

Black
Blue

Acid
Lightning

Brass

Fire
Lightning

5 by 30 fI. line (Dex. save)
5 by 30 ft. line (Dex. save)
5 by 30 ft. line (Dex. save)

Bronze

Copper
Gold

Acid
Fire

Green

Poison

Red

Fire
Cold

Silver
White

Cold

5 by 30 ft. line (Dex. save)
5 by 30 fI.
15 ft. cone
15 ft. cone
15 fI. cone

line (Dex. save)
(Dex. save)
(Con. save)
(Dex. save)

15 fI. cone (Con. save)
15 fI. cone (Con. save)

••

DRACONIANS

In the Dragonlance selling, lhe followers of the evil goddess
Takhisis learned a dark ritual that let them corrupt the
eggs of metallic dragons. producing evil dragonborn called
draconians. Five types of draconians. corresponding to the
five types of metallic dragons, fought for Takhisis in the War
ofthe Lance: auraks (gold). baaz (brass), bozak (bronze).
kapak (copper). and sivak (silver). In place of their draconic
breath weapons, they have unique magical abilities.

•••

Your draconic heritage manifests in a variety of traits
you share with other dragonborn.
Ability Score Increase. Your Strength score
increases by 2. and your Charisma score increases by 1.
Age. Young dragonborn grow quickly. They walk
hours after hatching. altain the size and development
of a IO-year-old human child by the age of 3. and reach
adulthood by 15. They Iive to be around 80.
AJignment. Dragonborn tend to extremes. making a
conscious choice for one side or the other in the cosmic
war between good and evil (represented by Bahamut
and Tiamat. respectively). Most dragonborn are good.
but those who side with Tiamat can be terrible villains.
Size. Dragonborn are taller and heavier than humans.
standing well over 6 feet tall and averaging almost 250
pounds. Your size is Medium.
Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 feet.
DRACONIC

•••

••

DraconicAncestry. Vou have draconic ancestry.
Choose one type of dragon from the Draconic Ancestry
table. Your breath weapon and damage resistance are
determined by lhe dragon type. as shown in the table.
Breath Weapon. Vou can use your action to exhale
destructive energy. Your draconic ancestry determines
the size, shape. and damage type of the exhalation.
When you use your breath weapon, each creature in
the area of the exhalation must make a saving throw.
the type of which is determined by your draconic
ancestry. The DC for this saving throw equals 8 +
your Constitution modifier + your proficiency bonus. A
creature takes 2d6 damage on a failed save. and half
as much damage on a successful one. The damage
increases to 3d6 at 6th levei. 4d6 at 11th leveI, and 5d6
at 16th leveI.
After you use your breath weapon, you can't use it
again until you complete a short or long resl.
Damage Resistance. Vou have resistance to the
damage type associated with your draconic ancestry.
Languages. Vou can speak. read, and write Common
and Draconic. Draconic is thought to be one of the
oldest languages and is often used in the study of magic.
The language sounds harsh to most other creatures and
includes numerous hard consonants and sibilants.

GNOME
SKINNY AND FLAXEN-HAIRED,

HIS SKIN

walnut brown and his eyes a startling
turquoise. Burgell stood half as tall as Aeron an

ad to

climb up on a stool to look out the peephole. Like most habitations in Oeble. that particular tenement had been built
for humans, and smaller residents coped with the resulting
awkwardness as best they could.
But at least the relative largeness ofthe apartment gave
Burgell room to pack in ali his gnome-sized gear. Thefront
room was his workshop. and it contained a bewildering
miscellany of tools: hammers. chisels. saws. lockpicks,
tinted lenses.jeweler's loupes. andjars of powdered and
shredded ingredients for casting spells. Afat gray cat. the
mage'sfamiliar, lay curled atop a grimoire. Tt opened its
eyes. gave Aeron a disdainjulyellow stare. then appeared
to go back to sleep.
-Richard

Lee Byers, The Black Bouquet

A constant hum of busy activity pervades the warrens
and neighborhoods where gnomes form their closeknit communities. Louder sounds punctuate the hum:
a crunch of grinding gears here, a minor explosion
there, a yelp of surprise or triumph, and especially
bursts of laughter. Gnomes take de!ight in !ife, enjoying
every moment of invention, exploration, investigation,
creation, and play.

VIBRANT

EXPRESSION

A gnome's energy and enthusiasm for living shines
through every inch of his or her tiny body. Gnomes
average slightly over 3 feet tall and weigh 40 to 45
pounds. Their tan or brown faces are usually adorned
with broad smiles (beneath their prodigious noses),
and their bright eyes shine with excitement. Their

fair hair has a tendency to stick out in every direction,
as if expressing the gnome's insatiable interest in
everything around.
A gnome's persona!ity is writ large in his or ber
appearance. A male gnome's beard, in contrast to
his wild hair, is kept carefully trimmed but often
styled into curious forks or neat points. A gnome's
clothing, though usually made in modest earth tones,
is elaborately decorated with embroidery, embossing,
or gleaming jewels.

DELIGHTED

DEDICATION

As far as gnomes are concerned, being a!ive is a
wonderful thing, and they squeeze every ounce of
enjoyment out of their three to tive centuries of !ife.
Humans might wonder about getting bored over the
course of such a long tife, and elves take plenty of time
to savor the beauties of the world in their long years, but
gnomes seem to worry that even with ali that time, they
can't get in enough of the things they want to do and see.
Gnomes speak as if they can't get the thoughts
out of their heads fast enough. Even as they offer
ideas and opinions on a range of subjects, they still
manage to listen carefully to others, adding the
appropriate exclamations of surprise and appreciation
along the way.
PART

I

RACES

35

DEEP GNOMES

A third subrace of gnomes, the deep gnomes (or svirfneblin),
live in small communities
scattered in the Underdark. Unlike
the duergar and the drow, svirfneblin are as good as their
surface cousins. However, their humor and enthusiasm
are dampened
by their oppressive
environment,
and their
inventive expertise is directed mostly toward stonework.

~
Though gnomes love jokes of ali kinds, particularly
puns and pranks, they're just as dedicaled lo lhe more
serious tasks they undertake, Many gnomes are skilled
engineers, alchemists, tinkers, and inventors, They're
willing to make mistakes and laugh at themselves in
lhe process of perfecting what they do, taking bold
(sometimes foolhardy) risks and dreaming large,

BRIGHT BURROWS
Gnomes make their homes in hilly, wooded lands. They
live underground but get more fresh air than dwarves
do, enjoying the natural, living world on the surface
whenever lhey can, Their homes are well hidden by
bolh elever conslruclion and simple illusions, Welcome
visitors are quickly ushered inlo lhe bright, warm
burrows, Those who are not welcome are unlikely to
find the burrows in lhe first place,
Gnomes who setlle in human lands are commonly
gemcutlers, engineers, sages, or tinkers. Some human
families relain gnome lutors, ensuring lhat their pupils
enjoy a mix of serious learning and delighted enjoyment.
A gnome mighl tutor severa I generalions of a single
human family over the course of his or her long life.

~

Male Names: Alston, Alvyn, Boddynock, Brocc, Burgell,
Dimble, Eldon, Erky, Fonkin, Frug, Gerbo, Gimble,
Glim,Jebeddo, Kellen, Namfoodle, Orryn, Roondar,
Seebo, Sindri, Warryn, Wrenn, Zook
Female Names: Bimpnollin, Breena, Caramip, Carlin,
Donella, Duvamil, ElIa, ElIyjobell, ElIywick, Lilli,
Loopmottin, Lorilla, Mardnab, Nissa, Nyx, Oda, Orla,
Roywyn, Shamil, Tana, Waywocket, Zanna
Clan Names: Beren, Daergel, Folkor, Garrick, Nackle,
Murnig, Ningel, Raulnor, Scheppen, Timbers, Turen
Nicknames: Aleslosh, Ashhearlh, Badger, Cloak,
Doublelock, Filchbatler, Fnipper, Ku, Nim, Oneshoe,
Pock, Sparklegem, Stumbleduck

SEEING THE WORLD
Curious and impulsive, gnomes might take up
adventuring as a way to see the world ar for lhe lave
of exploring. As lovers of gems and other fine ilems,
some gnomes take to adventuring as a quick, if
dangerous, path to wealth. Regardless of what spurs
them lo adventure, gnomes who adopt this way of life
eke as much enjoymenl out of it as they do oul of any
other activity they undertake, sometimes to lhe great
annoyance of lheir adventuring companions.

GNOME NAMES
Gnomes love names, and most have half a dozen or so.
A gnome's mother, falher, elan elder, aunts, and uneles
each give the gnome a name, and various nicknames
from juSl about everyone else might or might not stick
over time. Gnome names are typically variants on the
names of ancestors or distant relalives, lhough some
are purely new inventions. When dealing with humans
and others who are "stuffy" aboul names, a gnome
learns to use no more than three names: a personal
name, a elan na me, and a nickname, choosing lhe one in
each calegory that's the most fun to say.

PART

I

I

RACES

GNOME TRAITS
Your gnome character has certain characteristics in
common with ali other gnomes.
Ability Scare lncrease. Your Intelligence score
increases by 2.
Age. Gnomes mature at lhe same rate humans do, and
most are expected to settle down into an adult life by
around age 40. They can live 350 to almosl 500 years.
Alignment. Gnomes are most oflen good. Those who
lend toward law are sages, engineers, researchers,
scholars, invesligators, ar inventors. Those who lend
toward chaos are minslrels, lrickslers, wanderers,
ar fandful jewelers. Gnomes are good-hearted, and

, UI

4
ALWAYS

•
ApPRECIATIVE

It's rare for a gnome to be hostile ar malicious unless he
ar she has suffered a grievous injury. Gnomes know that
most races don't share their sense of humor, but they enjoy
anyone's company just as they enjoy everything else they set
out to do.

~

~

even the tricksters among them are more playful
than vicious.
Size. Gnomes are between 3 and 4 feet tall and
average about 40 pounds. Your size is Small.
Speed. Your base walking speed is 25 feel.
Darkvision. Accustomed to life underground, you have
superior vision in dark and dim conditions. Vou can
see in dim light within 60 feet of you as if it were bright
light, and in darkness as if it were dim lighl. Vou can't
discern colar in darkness, only shades of gray.
Gnome Cunning. Vou have advantage on ali
Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma saving throws
against magic.
Languages. Vou can speak, read, and write Common
and Gnomish. The Gnomish language, which uses the
Owarvish script, is renowned for its technical treatises
and its catalogs of knowledge about the natural world.
Subrace. Two subraces of gnomes are found among
the worlds of 0&0: forest gnomes and rock gnomes.
Choose one of these subraces.
FOREST GNOME

As a forest gnome, you have a natural knack for iIlusion
and inherent quickness and stealth. In the worlds of
0&0, forest gnomes are rare and secretive. They gather
in hidden communities in sylvan forests, using iIlusions
and trickery to conceal themselves from threats ar
to mask their escape should they be detected. Forest
gnomes tend to be friendly with other good-spirited
woodland folk, and they regard elves and good feyas
their most important allies. These gnomes also befriend
small forest animais and rely on them for information
about threats that might prowl their lands.
Ability Score Increase. Your Oexterity score
increases by 1.
Natural I1lusionist. Vou know the minor illusion
cantrip. lntelligence is your spellcasting ability for il.
Speak with Small Beasts. Through sounds and
gestures, you can communicate simple ideas with Small
ar smaller beasts. Forest gnomes love animaIs and often
keep squirrels, badgers, rabbits, moles, woodpeckers,
and other creatures as beloved pets.
ROCK GNOME

As a rock gnome, you have a natural inventiveness and
hardiness beyond that of other gnomes. Most gnomes
in the worlds of 0&0 are rock gnomes, including the
tinker gnomes of the Oragonlance setting.

AbiJity Score Increase. Your Constitution score
increases by 1.
Artificer's Lore. Whenever you make an Intelligence
(History) check related to magic items, alchemical
objects, ar technological devices, you can add twice your
proficiency bonus, instead of any proficiency bonus you
normallyappIy.
Tinker. Vou have proficiency with artisan's toois
(tinker's tools). Using those tools, you can spend 1
hour and 10 gp worth of materiaIs to construct a Tiny
c1ockwork device (AC 5, 1 hp). The device ceases
to function after 24 hours (unless you spend 1 hour
repairing it to keep the device functioning), ar when
you use your action to dismantle it; at that time, you can
reclaim the materiaIs used to create il. Vou can have up
to three such devices active at a time.
When you create a device, choose one of the
following options:
Clockwork Toy. This toy is a c1ockwork animal, monster,
ar person, such as a frog, mouse, bird, dragon, ar
soldier. When placed on the grou nd, the toy moves
5 feet across the ground on each of your turns in a
random direction. lt makes noises as appropriate
to the creature it represents.
Fire Starter. The device produces a miniature
flame, which you can use to light a candle,
torch, ar campfire. Using the device
requires your action.
Music Sox. When opened, this music box
plays a single song at a moderate volume.
The box stops playing when it
reaches the song's end ar
when it is c1osed.

"Tanis?" said Flint hesitant/y as the man neared.
"The same." The newcomer's beardedface split in a wide
grin. He held open his arms and, before the dwarf could
stop him, engulfed Flint in a hug that lifted him off the
ground. The dwarf clasped his oldfriend closefor a brief
instant, then, rememberinghis digni(y, squirmed andfreed
himself from lhe half-elf's embrace.
-Margaret

Weis and Tracy Hickman,
Dragons of Autumn Twilight

HALF-ELF
FUNT

SQUINTED

INTO THE SETTING

SUN. HE THOUGHT

he saw theftgure of a man striding up the path. 5tanding,

Walking in two worlds but truly belonging to neither,
half-elves combine what some say are the best qualities
of their elf and human parents: human curiosity,
inventiveness, and ambition tempered by the refined
senses, love of nature, and artistic tastes of the elves.
Some half-elves Iive among humans, set apart by their
emotional and physical differences, watching friends
and loved ones age while time barely touches them.
Others Iive with the elves, growing restless as they
reach adulthood in the timeless elven realms, while
their peers continue to Iive as children. Many half-elves,
unable to fit into either society, choose Iives of solitary
wandering or join with other misfits and outcasts in
the adventuring life.

Flint drew back into the shadow of a tall pine to see better.
The man's walk was marked by an easy grace-an eluish
grace, Flint would haue said;yet the man's body had lhe
thickness and tight muscles of a human, while thefacial
hair was deftnite/y humankind's. Ali the dwarf could see
of the man'sface beneath a green hood was tan skin and a
brownish-red beard. A longbow was slung ouer one shoulder
and a sword hung at his left side. He was dressed in soft
leather, careful/y tooled in the intricate designs the elues
loued. But no elfin the world of Krynn could grow a beard
... no elf, but ...

PA RT 1

I

RACES

OF Two WORLDS
To humans, half-elves look Iike elves, and to elves, they
look humano In height, they're on par with both parents,
though they're neither as slender as elves nor as broad
as humans. They range fram under 5 feet to about 6 feet
ta lI, and from 100 to 180 pounds, with men only slightly
talIer and heavier than women. Half-elf men do have
facial hair, and sometimes grow beards to mask their
elven ancestry. Half-elven coloration and features lie
somewhere between their human and elf parents, and
thus sh'ow a variety even more pronounced than that
found among either race. They tend to have the eyes
of their elven parents.

EXCELLENT

AM BASSADORS

Many half.elves leam at an early age to get along with
everyone, defusing hostility and finding common ground.
As a race, they have elven grace wilhoul elven aloofness and
human energy wilhout human boorishness. They oflen make
excellenl ambassadors and go.belweens (excepl between
elves and humans, since each side suspecls lhe half.elf
offavoring lhe olher).

DIPLOMATS

OR WANDERERS

Half-elves have no lands of their own, though they are
welcome in human cities and somewhat less welcome
in elven forests. In large cities in regions where elves
and humans interact often, half-elves are sometimes
numerous enough to form small communities of their
own. They enjoy the company of other half-elves, the
onIy people who truIy understand what it is to live
between these two worlds.
In most parts of the world. though, haIf-eIves are
uncommon enough that one might live for years
without meeting another. Some half-elves prefer to
avoid company altogether, wandering the wilds as
trappers, foresters, hunters, or adventurers and visiting
civilization onIy rarely. Like elves, they are driven by
the wanderIust that comes of their longevity. Others,
in contrast, throw themselves into the thick of society,
putting their charisma and social skilIs to great use
in diplomatic roles or as swindlers.

crealive expression, demonstrating neither love
of Jeaders nor desire for followers. They chafe at
rules, resenl others' demands, and sometimes prove
unreliable, or at least unpredictable.
Size. HaIf-eIves are about the same size as humans,
ranging from 5 to 6 feet taIl. Vour size is Medium.
Speed. Vour base walking speed is 30 feel.
Darkvision. Thanks to your elfblood, you have
superior vision in dark and dim conditions. Vou can
see in dim light within 60 feet of you as if it were bright
light, and in darkness as if it were dim lighl. Vou can't
discern color in darkness, only shades of gray.
Fey Ancestry. Vou have advantage on saving throws
against being charmed, and magic can't put you to sleep.
Skill VersatiJity. Vou gain proficiency in two skilIs
of your choice.
Languages. Vou can speak, read, and write Common,
EIvish, and one extra language of your choice,

HALF- ELF NAMES
Half-elves use either human or elven naming
conventions. As if to emphasize that they don't really fit
in to either society, half-elves raised among humans are
often given elven names, and those raised among elves
often take human names.

HALF- ELF TRAITS
Vour half-elf character has some qualities in common
with elves and some that are unique to half-elves.
AbiJity Score Increase. Vour Charisma score
increases by 2, and two other ability scores of your
choice increase by I.
Age. Half-elves mature at the same rate humans
do and reach adulthood around the age of 20. They
live much longer than humans, however, often
exceeding 180 years.
AJignment. Half-elves share the chaotic bent of their
elven heritage. They value both personal freedom and
PART 1

RACES

39

Whether united under the leadership of a mighty
warloek OI' having fought to a standstill after years
of eonfliet, ore and human tribes sometimes form
allianees, joining forces into a larger horde lo lhe terror
of eivilized lands nearby. When lhese allianees are
sealed by marriages, half-ores are bom. Some half-ores
rise lo beeome proud ehiefs of ore lribes, lheir human
blood giving them an edge over lheir full-blooded ore
rivaIs. Some venture inlo lhe world lo prove lheir worlh
among humans and other more civilized raees. Many of
lhese beeome advenlurers, aehieving grealness for lheir
mighly deeds and nOloriely for their barbarie eustoms
and savage fury.

SCARRED AND STRONG
THE WARCHIEF MHURREN

ROUSED HIMSELF FROM HIS

sleeping-furs and his women and pulled a short hauberk
of heauy steel rings ouer his thick. well-muscled torso. He
usual{y rose before most of his warriors. since he had a
strong streak of human blood in him. and hefound the
daylight less bothersome than most of his tribe did. Among
the Bloody Skulls. a warrior was judged by his strength. his
jlerceness. and his wits. Human ancestry was no blemish
against a warrior-prauided he was euery bit as strang.
enduring. and bloodthirsty as hisfull-blooded kin. Halforcs who were weaker than their orc comrades didn't last
long among the Bloody Skulls
that matter. Rut

it

OI'

any other orc tribefor

was often true that a bit of human blood

gave a warrior just the right mix of cunning. ambition, and
self-discipline to go far indeed. as Mhurren had. He was
master of a tribe that could muster two thousand spears.
and the strangest chiefin TlJar.
-Richard

4-0

PART

I

I

RACES

Baker. Swordmage

Half-ores' grayish pigmenlation, sloping foreheads,
juttingjaws, prominenl leelh, and lowering builds make
their orcish herilage plain for ali lo see. Half-ores sland
belween 6 and 7 feel lall and usually weigh belween
180 and 250 pounds.
Ores regard battle sears as lokens of pride and
ornamenlal sears as lhings of beauly. OlheI' sears,
though, mark an ore 01' half-ore as a formeI' slave 01'
a disgraeed exile. Any half-ore who has lived among
01' near ores has sears, whelher lhey are marks of
humilialion 01' of pride, reeounling their pasl exploils
and injuries. Sueh a half-ore living among humans might
display lhese sears proudly 01' hide them in shame.

THE MARK OF GRUUMSH
The one-eyed god Gruumsh erealed lhe ores, and even
those ores who turn away from his worship ean'l fully
escape his influenee. The same is lrue of haIf-ores.
lhough lheir human blood moderales lhe impaet of lheir
orcish heritage. Some half-ores hear the whispers of
Gruumsh in lheir dreams, ealling lhem lo unleash lhe
rage tha! simmers wilhin lhem. Others feel Gruumsh's

GRUDGING

exultation when they join in melee eombat-and either
exult along with him or shiver with fear and loathing.
Half-ores are not evil by nature, but evil does lurk within
them, whether they embraee it or rebel against it.
Beyond the rage of Gruumsh, half-ores feel emotion
powerfully. Rage doesn't jusl quieken their pulse, it
makes their bodies burn. An insult stings tike acid,
and sadness saps their strength. But they laugh loudly
and heartily, and simple bodily pleasures-feasting,
drinking, wrestling, drumming, and wild dancing-fill
their hearls with joy. They tend to be short-tempered
and sometimes sullen, more inclined to aelion than
eontemplation and to fighting than arguing. The mosl
aeeomplished half-ores are lhose with enough self.
eontrol to get by in a civilized land.

TRIBES AND SLUMS
Half-ores most often live among ores. Of the other raees,
humans are most tikely to aeeept half.ores, and half.
ores almost always live in human lands when not living
among ore lribes. Whether proving themselves among
rough barbarian tribes or serabbling to survive in the
slums of larger cities, half-ores gel by on their physieal
might, their enduranee, and lhe sheer determinalion
lhey inheril from lheir human aneeslry.

HALF-ORC

NAMES

Half-ores usually have names appropriate lo the eullure
in whieh they were raised. A half-ore who wanls lo fit in
among humans mighl trade an ore name for a human
name. Some half-ores wilh human names decide to
adopt a guttural ore na me beeause they lhink it makes
lhem more intimidating.
Male Ore Names: Deneh, Feng, Gell, Henk, Holg, Imsh,
Kelh, Krusk, Mhurren, Ront. Shump. Thokk
Female Ore Names: Baggi, Emen, Engong. Kansif.
Myev. Neega. Ovak, Ownka, Shaulha, Sulha. Vola,
Volen, Yevelda

HALF-ORC

TRAITS

Your half-ore eharaeter has eertain traits deriving from
your ore aneestry.

ACCEPTANCE

Eaeh half.ore finds a way to gain aeeeptanee
from those who
hate ores. Some are reserved, trying not to draw atlention to
themselves.
A few demonstrate
piety and good.heartedness
as publicly as they ean (whether ar not sueh demonstrations
are genuine). And some simply try to be so tough that others
just avoid them.

••
Abi/ity Score lncrease. Your Strength seore
inereases by 2, and your Constitution score
inereases by I.
Age. Half-ores mature a tittle faster than humans,
reaehing adulthood around age 14. They age
notieeably faster and rarely tive longer than 75 years.
Alignment. Half-ores inherit a tendeney toward ehaos
from their ore parents and are not strongly inclincd
toward good. Half-ores raised among ores and willillg
to tive out their tives among them are usually evil.
Size. Half-ores are somewhat largcr and bulkier than
humans, and they range from 5 to well over ti feet tall.
Your size is Medium.
Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 feet.
Darkvision. Thanks to your ore blood. you have
superior vision in dark and dim eOllditions. Vou ean
see in dim tight within 60 feet of you as if it were bright
tight. and in darkness as if it were dim light. You ean't
diseern eolor in darkness, only shades of gray.
Menacing. You gain proficieney in the
Intimidation skill.
Relentless Endurance. When you are reduced to
O hit points but not killed outright. you can drop to I hit
point instead. Vou can't use this feature again unti! you
finish a long resto
Savage Attacks. When you score a criticaI hit with
a melee weapon attack, you can roll one of thc wcapon's
damage dice one additional time and add it lo lhe extra
damage of lhe criticaI hit.
Languages. You can speak. read, and
write Common and Ore. Ore is a
harsh. grating language with
hard consonants. It has
no script of its own
but is written in the
Dwarvish script.

that wicked glint in his eyes. "Youfight It, don'tyou? Like
a little wildcat, I wager. Every littlejab and commentjust
sharpensyour

c1aws."
-Erin

M. Evans, Brimstone Angels

To be greeted with stares and whispers, to suffer
violence and insult on the street, to see mistrust and
fear in every eye: this is the lot of the tiefling. And to
twist the knife, tieflings know that this is because a
pact struck generations ago infused the essence of
Asmodeus-overlord of the Nine Hells-into their
bloodline. Their appearance and their nature are not
their fault but the result of an ancient sin, for which
they and their children and their children's children
will always be held accountable.

INFERNAL BLOODLINE

TIEFLING
"BUT

VOU DO SEE THE WAY PEOPLE LOOK AT VOU,

devil's child."

Those block eyes, cold as a winter storm, were staring
right into her heart and the sudden seriousness in his
voice jolted her.
"What is it they say?" he asked. "One's a curiosity, two's
a conspiracy-"
"Three's a curse," shefinished. "You think I haven't heard
that rubbish before?"
"I knowyou have." When sheglared at him, he added,
"[t's not as if l'm plumbing the depths ofyour mind, dear
girl. That is the burden of every tiefling. Some break under
it, some make it the millstone around their neck, some
revel in it." He tilted his head again, scrutinizingher,

42

PART 1

I

RACES

with

Tieflings are derived fram human bloodlines, and in the
broadest possible sense, they stilllook humano However,
their infernal heritage has left a elear imprint on their
appearance. Tieflings have large horns that take any
of a variety of shapes: some have curling horns like a
ram, others have straight and tall horns like a gazelle's,
and some spiral upward like an antelopes' horns. They
have thick tails, four to tive feet long, which lash or coil
around their legs when they get upset or nervous. Their
canine teeth are sharply pointed, and their eyes are
solid colors-black, red, white, silver, or gold-with no
visible selera or pupil. Their skin tones cover the full
range of human coloration, but also inelude various
shades of red. Their hair, cascading down from behind
their horns, is usually dark, from black or brown to dark
red, blue, or purple.

SELF- RELIANT

AND SUSPICIOUS

Tieflings subsist in small minorities found mostly in
human cities or towns, often in the roughest quarters
of those places, where they grow up to be swindlers,

MUTUAL

thieves, or crime lords, Sometimes they live among
other minority populations in enclaves where they are
treated with more respect.
Lacking a homeland, tieftings know that they have
to make their own way in the world and that they have
to be strong to survive, They are not quick to trust
anyone who claims to be a friend. but when a tiefling's
companions demonstrate that they trust him or her,
the tiefting learns to extend the same trust to them,
And once a tiefting gives someone loyalty, the tiefting
is a firm friend or ally for life,
TIEFLING

NAMES

Tiefting names fali into three broad categories. Tieftings
born into another culture typically have names reftective
of that culture. Some have names derived from the
Infernallanguage, passed down through generations,
that reftect their fiendish heritage. And some younger
tieftings. striving to find a place in the world, adopt a
na me that signifies a virtue or other concept and then
try to embody that concept. For some. the chosen na me
is a noble quest. For others. it's a grim destiny.
Male Infernal Names: Akmenos, Amnon, Barakas,
Damakos, Ekemon, lados, Kairon. Leucis, Melech.
Mordai, Morthos. Pelaios, Skamos. Therai
Female Infernal Names: Akta, Anakis, Bryseis, Criella.
Damaia. Ea. Kallista. Lerissa. Makaria. Nemeia,
Orianna. Phelaia. Rieta
"Virtue" Names: Art. Carrion, Chant, Creed, Despair,
Excellence, Fear, Glory, Hope, Ideal. Music. Nowhere.
Open, Poetry, Quest. Random. Reverence, Sorrow.
Temerily, Torment, Weary

MISTRUST

Peopletend to be suspicious of tieflings. assuming that
their infernalheritage has left its mark on their personality
and morality.not just their appearance. Shopkeepers keep
a close eye on their goods when lieflingsenler lheir stores.
the lown walch mighl followa lieflingaround for a while.
and demagogues blame lieflings for slrange happenings.
The realily.lhough. is lhal a liefling's bloodlinedoesn'l affecl
his or her personalilylo any greal degree. Yearsof dealing
wilh mislrusl does leaveils mark on mosllieflings. and lhey
respond lo il in differenlways.Some choose lo Iiveup lo lhe
wickedslereolype. bul olhers are virluous. Mosl are simply
veryaware ofhow people respond lo lhem. Aflerdealing wilh
lhis mislrusllhroughoul youlh. a lieflingoflen develops lhe
abililylo overcome prejudicelhrough charm or inlimidalion.

~
TIEFLING

~
TRAITS

Tieflings share cerlain racial traits as a result of their
infernal descent.
AbiJity Seore Inerease. Your lntelligence score
increases by 1, and your Charisma score increases by 2.
Age. Tieflings mature at the same rate as humans but
live a few years longer.
Alignment. Tieftings might not have an innate
tendency toward evil. but many of them end up there.
Evil or noto an independent nature inclines many
tieflings toward a chaotic alignment.
Size. Tieftings are about the same size and build as
humans. Your size is Medium.
Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 feet.
Darkvision. Thanks lOyour infernal heritage, you
have superior vision in dark and dim conditions. You
can see in dim Iight within 60 feet of you as if it were
bright 1ight. and in darkness as if it were dim light. You
can't discern color in darkness. only shades of gray.
Hellish Resistance. You have resistance
to fire damage.
Infernal Legaey. You know the thaumatuqJy cantrip.
Once you reach 3rd levei, you can cast the hellish
rebuke spell once per day as a 2nd-levei spell. Once you
reach 5th levei, you can also cast the darkness spell
once per day. Charisma is your spellcasting ability for
these spclls.
Languages. You can speak. read. and write Common
and Infernal.

